ACCT 100	Foundations of Accounting I	3 Units	Accounting is the language of business and this course exposes students to that language. This course introduces students to the basic principles, objectives, terminology and role of financial, managerial, and tax accounting in business. This course is intended for both business and non-business majors. This is the first required accounting course for all business majors.
ACCT 106	Spreadsheet Basics for Business and Non-Business Majors	1 Unit	This one hour class combines classroom and project work to complete assignments leveraging Microsoft Excel 365. Through this course, students will gain an understanding of data, data extraction, creation of data models and use of spreadsheet technology for solving business information related problems. Prereq: No previous credit for ACCT 207.
ACCT 200	Foundations of Accounting II	3 Units	This course teaches future business professionals how to produce and use financial information for business decisions. This course expands upon the basic principles and objectives of financial and managerial accounting providing business students with essential skills for any business career. This course is the second required accounting course for all WSOM business majors. Prereq: ACCT 100.
ACCT 300	Corporate Reporting I	3 Units	The Corporate Reporting sequence provides an understanding of the basic financial statements and disclosures, revenue and expense recognition, profitability analysis, and the effect of business transactions on a company's financial statements and footnotes.  This is the first course in the Corporate Reporting sequence, with a particular emphasis on key concepts, as well as certain accounts (cash, receivables and inventory). Prereq: ACCT 101 or ACCT 200.
ACCT 301	Corporate Reporting II	3 Units	The Corporate Reporting sequence provides an understanding of the basic financial statements and disclosures, revenue and expense recognition, profitability analysis, and the effect of business transactions on a company's financial statements and footnotes.  This is the second course in the Corporate Reporting sequence, with a particular emphasis on certain accounts (property plant and equipment, investments, and various liabilities, including long-term debt, leases, pensions and other postretirement benefits). International (IFRS) aspects also are considered. Prereq: ACCT 300. Coreq: ACCT 301L.
ACCT 301L	Technology Lab for Corporate Reporting II	1 Unit	In this lab, students will learn about the technology tools currently used in the professional environment to advance their ability to report and analyze financial accounting data. Examples of foundational tools include advanced spreadsheet functions and data collection/download tools. The knowledge gained in this lab will be applied in ACCT 301, Corporate Reporting II, taken concurrently with the lab. Prereq: ACCT 106 and no previous credit for ACCT 207.  Coreq: ACCT 301.
ACCT 305	Income Tax: Concepts, Skills, Planning	3 Units	This course addresses U.S. Federal Income Taxation concepts and applications.  The subject matter includes topics applicable to individuals, partnerships and corporations and various other entities required to file income tax returns.  In addition the subject matter addressed includes a variety of business, legal and taxation concepts and practices related to effective tax planning.  The purpose of the course is to provide the student with the appropriate knowledge and skill levels to "speak the language of U.S. tax." Prereq: Sophomore Standing.
ACCT 306	Accounting Information Systems	3 Units	This course introduces the students to the major business cycles as they relate to Accounting Information Systems, including the revenue, procurement and conversion cycles. Additionally, students will be introduced to risks and controls in accounting systems, as well as emerging accounting technology. Prereq: ACCT 100 or ACCT 102.
ACCT 307	Applied Management Accounting	3 Units	This course advances students' ability to use management accounting to evaluate decisions, businesses, and managers. Students will begin with the idea that management accounting is a dialect within the language of accounting, explore varied types of costs and their relationships to pricing, and then use these concepts to assess decisions, organizations, and performance. Case studies will be used to stress application of management accounting concepts to problems faced in the real-world business environment. Students will use advanced spreadsheet functions and data analytics/visualization tools to further develop their proficiency at using management accounting to evaluate decisions, businesses, and managers. Prereq: ACCT 102 or ACCT 200.  Coreq: ACCT 307L.
ACCT 307L	Technology Lab for Management Accounting	1 Unit	In this lab, students will learn about the technology tools currently used in the professional environment to further develop their proficiency at using management accounting in evaluating decisions, businesses, and managers. Examples of foundational technology tools include advanced spreadsheet functions and data analytics/visualization tools. The knowledge gained in this lab will be applied in ACCT 307, Applied Management Accounting, taken concurrently with the lab. Prereq: ACCT 106 and no previous credit for ACCT 207.  Coreq: ACCT 307.
ACCT 314	Attestation and Assurance Services	3 Units	This course covers the role of the auditor, the audit process, the public accounting profession, audit risk and materiality, fraud, audit methods and techniques, audit planning, internal control, the effects of information technology on the audit, auditing revenue, receivables and inventories, professional ethics, legal responsibilities, emerging assurance services, and recent developments in the auditing profession. Prereq: ACCT 301.
ACCT 360	Independent Study	1 - 18 Units	
ACCT 401H	Accounting for Healthcare	3 Units	This course exposes MSM-Healthcare students to ways that accounting information helps managers monitor and improve the performance of organizations. After studying the nature and limitations of accounting information, we explore how financial, cost, tax, and regulatory accounting are used by various stakeholders.  From this effort, students become comfortable evaluating accounting recognition, valuation, classification, and disclosure issues that arise in an executive's career.  Finally, we study how accounting is a feedback loop that enables managers to assess consequences of past decisions and think about what should be done going forward.   Feedback loops, in turn, can give rise to observer effects and/or unpredictable outcomes.  Course content contributes to achieving the program goal of strengthening a student's ability to promote positive change in healthcare. Prereq: Master of Healthcare Management students only.
ACCT 404	Advanced Financial Reporting	3 Units	This course covers advanced financial reporting topics including financial statement consolidations, foreign currency translations and transactions, VIE's, (variable interest entities), derivatives, segment reporting, and interim financial statement reporting. As a graduate course, a master's level project or paper will be required. Prereq: ACCT 301.
ACCT 405	Advanced Federal Taxes	3 Units	Corporate income taxes, estate and gift tax, fiduciary income taxes, partnerships, and hybrid forms of organization are covered. Prereq: ACCT 305.
ACCT 414	Corporate Reporting and Analysis	3 Units	This course provides a basis for identification, analysis, and interpretation of data from accounting, finance, and other business sources for decision making by investors, creditors, and company management. Students are introduced to concepts and analytical techniques/models that can be used to assess and interpret the financial health of a business and its intrinsic value. At a practical and theoretical level, the course integrates knowledge from the areas of accounting, economics, organizational behavior, and finance, which has proven useful in the quantitative analysis of organizational performance and value. Students are expected to be proficient with Canvas, Excel, and Word. Prereq: (ACCT 300 or ACCT 401H or MBAC 502 or MBAP 402 or MBAP 402H) and (BAFI 355 or MBAC 504 or MBAP 405 or MBAP 405H) and (OPRE 207 or MBAC 511 or MBAP 403 or MBAP 403H).
ACCT 431	Client Communication, Ethics, and Professionalism	3 Units	This course is designed to help prepare students for the role of being a professional advisor in dynamic and often uncertain technical scenarios while meeting ethical and professional responsibilities to all relevant stakeholders. Class sessions and assignments have an overarching emphasis on professionalism, ethics and client communications. This course utilizes the U.S. Federal tax law as the primary underlying body of knowledge driving discussions and learning. Prereq: ACCT 305.
ACCT 444	Advanced Auditing Theory and Practice	3 Units	This course examines auditing concepts and issues in depth. A special focus exists on audit evidence and how auditors make decisions. Some topic areas include professional ethics, auditor legal liability, audit firm regulation, risk assessment, internal control over financial reporting, auditing estimates, and fraud. Prereq: ACCT 314.
ACCT 501	Special Problems and Topics	0 - 18 Units	This course is offered, with permission, to students undertaking reading in a field of special interest.
ACCT 520	Advanced Accounting Theory	3 Units	This seminar studies contemporary issues in financial accounting theory and business reporting. Topics are considered from their historical development to contemporary circumstances. Academic and professional literatures are employed to gain a variety of perspectives on current matters. The development of communication skills, written and verbal, and use of support technology for presentations is emphasized throughout. Students are required to make several individual and team presentations, to conduct database and periodical research and to provide frequent written and oral research reports. Prereq: ACCT 301.
ACCT 601	Special Problems and Topics	1 - 18 Units	This course is offered, with permission, to Ph.D. candidates undertaking reading in a field of special interest.
ACCT 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
AFST 135	Introduction to Modern African History	3 Units	A general introduction to major themes in modern African history, with an emphasis on the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.  Topics include oral tradition and narrative, economic structure and dynamics, religious movements, colonialism, nationalism, and the dilemmas of independent African states. Offered as AFST 135, ETHS 253A and HSTY 135. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
AFST 151	Introducing Africana Religions	3 Units	This "topics course" offers an introduction to the academic study of Africana Religions. Whether approached through a particular theme or as a general historical introduction, each section of this course provides students with a general introduction to the academic study of religion and basic religious literacy in religions of people of African origins in sub-Saharan African, the Caribbean, Europe, and the Americas and thus will explore forms of these traditions in a diversity of cultural contexts.  Section topics could include, but are not limited to:  Introducing Africana Religions: The Black Church in the U.S.,  Introducing Africana Religions: Yoruba Ifa Traditions, Introducing Africana Religions: Orisha Traditions in Latin America and the Caribbean,  Introducing Africana Religions: African American Religions,  Introducing Africana Religions: U.S. African-derived Religions.  Students may repeat the course for credit (up to 6 credits), provided that the two sections are different. Offered as AFST 151 and RLGN 151. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
AFST 202	Race and Ethnic Minorities in The United States	3 Units	This is a survey course that looks at the relations between racial and ethnic relations in the United States from an historical and contemporary perspective. This course will look at relations between: European colonists and native Americans; whites and blacks during the period of slavery, Jim Crow, the civil rights era and contemporary period; immigrants at the turn of the 20th and 21st century; Mexicans and Puerto Ricans; and the pan-ethnic groups such as Latinos, Asian Americans, and Arab Americans. We examine the origins of racial/ethnic hierarchies, the social construction of identities, and stratification of racial and ethnic groups. This course will take a macro perspective that examines larger structural forces (e.g., colonization, industrialization, and immigration) to explain inter-group relations, and a constructionist perspective to understand how power manufactures and maintains the social meaning of identities (looking at stereotypes and hegemonic discourse).  Students who have received credit for SOCI 302 may not receive credit for SOCI 202. Offered as AFST 202 and SOCI 202. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
AFST 212	History of Rock and Roll	3 Units	This course surveys the musical practices of the rock and roll era, broadly defined to include much popular music since the 1950s.  Music majors are to enroll in MUHI 312. Offered as AFST 212 and MUGN 212. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
AFST 219	Islam in America	3 Units	The United States is home to one of the most diverse Muslim communities in the world. Using a variety of primary and secondary sources, this course examines the rich history of Islam in the United States, from the 18th century to the present, as it relates to key moments within American politics, religion and culture, and to transnational developments in Islamic thought and practice. We will also explore important issues within contemporary Muslim communities, including gender, shari'a, and religious pluralism. In addition to studying the experiences of Muslim immigrants, students will also investigate the vital role of African-American Muslims and converts in the development of American Muslim institutions, beliefs and rituals. This course will also introduce students to the history of Islam in Cleveland, and provide them with the opportunity to contribute to original research on Muslim communities in our city. Offered as AFST 219, HSTY 279, RLGN 219, and WGST 219. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
AFST 258	History of Southern Africa	3 Units	A survey of southern Africa from about 1600. Topics include the social structure of pre-colonial African societies, the beginnings of European settlement, the rise of Shaka, the discovery of minerals and the development of industry, Zimbabwe's guerrilla war and independence, and the rise and apparent demise of apartheid. Offered as AFST 258, ETHS 258 and HSTY 258. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
AFST 260	U.S. Slavery and Emancipation	3 Units	Begins with the African encounter with Europeans during the emergence of the modern slave trade. Students are introduced to the documents and secondary literature on the creation and maintenance of slavery, first in colonial America, and then in the United States. The course concludes with the destruction of slavery. Offered as AFST 260, ETHS 260 and HSTY 260. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
AFST 261	African-American History 1865-1945	3 Units	Explores the fashioning of a modern African-American culture between emancipation and the end of World War II. Emergence of a northern-based leadership, the challenge of segregation, emergence of bourgeois culture, the fashioning of racial consciousness and black nationalism, the shift from a primarily southern and rural population to one increasingly northern and urban, the creation and contours of a modern African-American culture, the construction of racial/gender and racial/class consciousness. Offered as AFST 261, ETHS 261 and HSTY 261. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
AFST 262	African-American History Since 1945	3 Units	Completes the three-term sequence of the African-American history survey (although the first two courses are not prerequisites for this course). Explores some of the key events and developments shaping African-American social, political, and cultural history since 1945. Offered as AFST 262, ETHS 262 and HSTY 262. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
AFST 295	The Francophone World	3 Units	The course offers an introduction to the Francophone World from a historical, cultural, and literary perspective. The Francophone World includes countries and regions around the globe with a substantial French-speaking population (and where French is sometimes, but not always, an official language): North America (Louisiana, Quebec, and Acadia); North Africa (Tunisia, Morocco, Algeria, and Egypt); the Middle-East (Lebanon, Syria); the Caribbean (Martinique, Guadeloupe, Haiti); Southeast Asia (Vietnam); and Europe (France, Belgium, Switzerland, and Luxembourg). FRCH 295 provides a comprehensive overview of the Francophone World, while focusing on a particular area or areas in any given semester. Offered as AFST 295, ETHS 295, FRCH 295, and WLIT 295. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
AFST 302	The Lemonade Class: Religion, Race, Sex and Black Music	3 Units	Charles Long suggests that black musical forms are creative responses to the particular circumstances of black peoples' presence in the U.S and black notions of the sacred. In April of 2016, Beyoncé released her visual album Lemonade two days after the death of Prince. This course is organized around the album's title cuts and links these two artists together in an examination of religion and musical performance as creative response to the racial and gendered conditions of black life. The course investigates how both artists have used music as a platform to explore issues of race, gender, commerce, sexuality, power and divinity. The course also looks at examples from the works of earlier artists who address similar themes such as Ma Rainey, Bessie Smith, Muddy Waters, Billie Holiday, Nina Simone, Little Richard, James Brown, Marvin Gaye, and Aretha Franklin. Offered as AFST 302, ETHS 302, MUHI 316, RLGN 302, RLGN 402, and WGST 302. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
AFST 315	History of Jazz and American Popular Music	3 Units	Musical styles and structures of jazz and American popular music; emphasis on music since 1900. Recommended preparation: MUTH 202 or MUHI 302. Offered as AFST 315 and MUHI 315. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
AFST 318	History of Black Women in the U.S.	3 Units	Chronologically arranged around specific issues in black women's history organizations, participation in community and political movements, labor experiences, and expressive culture. The course will use a variety of materials, including autobiography, literature, music, and film. Offered as AFST 318, ETHS 318, HSTY 318, and WGST 318.
AFST 328	Capitalism, Cities, and Inequality	3 Units	This course focuses on social inequality, but through an examination of cities in the U.S. and abroad. In many ways, cities provide a window onto the organization of the larger social world, including regional, state, national and global areas. As such, understanding cities goes far beyond their geographical boundaries. The purpose of this course then is to learn the central role that cities play within a larger capitalist economy, how public policies shape life in cities, how cities organize and reproduce social inequality, and how community groups and organizations challenge and negotiate the organization of power and inequality. The course will examine topics such as the formal and informal labor force, immigration, the growth of global cities and slums, urban poverty, racial segregation, housing and homelessness, crime, gentrification, policing, community organization and political resistance. Offered as AFST 328, SOCI 328 and SOCI 428. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SOCI 101.
AFST 365N	Topics in African-American Literature	3 Units	Selected topics and writers from nineteenth, twentieth, and twenty-first century African-American literature.  May focus on a genre, a single author or a group of authors, a theme or themes.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as AFST 365N, ENGL 365N, ETHS 365N, WLIT 365N, ENGL 465N, and WLIT 465N. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
AFST 366	Racial Inequality and Mass Imprisonment in the US	3 Units	This course examines the relationship between racial inequality and mass imprisonment in the U.S. It begins by exploring the role of prisons in the Jim Crow south, with a particular focus on convict-leasing practices, and then turns to the north to examine the social forces that created the black urban ghetto and concentrated black urban poverty. The course also examines the impact that these same social forces have had on Puerto Ricans. We will then explore a series of topics including urban poverty and crime, the war on drugs, the politics of mass incarceration, the prospects that mass incarceration has become the new Jim Crow, and the effects that mass incarceration has had on voting rights, urban communities, families and children. We will conclude with a discussion of varying decarceration arguments, strategies, movements, and achievements. Offered as AFST 366 and SOCI 366. Prereq: SOCI 101 or SJUS 100.
AFST 386	Race and Racism	3 Units	Race and Racism will discuss the classical and contemporary understandings of the concepts of race and racism. We will begin by taking an historical approach, delving into processes of racialization and the first instances where distinctions in human race were noted. We will survey theories of race and use a social constructions approach to examine how sociologists approach the study of racial and ethnic group difference. We will examine how definitions of racial groups have evolved over time and differ across contexts, as well as some of the underlying social and structural processes that create racial hierarchies. At the end of the course students should have a strong understanding of the mechanisms that reproduce systems of racial classification. The course will also examine patterns and trends in racial and ethnic inequality over recent decades, centering our discussion on the legacies of racism, current discrimination, and new processes that are currently unfolding to reproduce inequality.While the course's main focus is to examine understandings of race and racism in the United States, we will devote some attention to how race and ethnicity emerge in different environments by examining race and racism in an international context. Offered as AFST 386, SOCI 386 and SOCI 486. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SOCI 101.
AFST 389	Special Topics in American Politics and Policy	3 Units	Specific topic will vary but will consist of an in-depth investigation of a particular policy area or political phenomenon. Topics will involve policy controversies of some current interest. Offered as AFST 389, POSC 389, and POSC 489.
AFST 393	Advanced Readings in the History of Race	3 Units	This course examines the concept of race as a social construction that carries political and economic implications.  We begin by examining the histories of the early racial taxonomists (e.g., Bernier, Linnaeus, and Blumenbach among others) and the contexts that informed their writings.  We then assess how the concept of race changed from the nineteenth to the twentieth century in the United States.  We conclude by evaluating how the ideology of race has influenced U.S. domestic life and foreign policy at specific historical moments. Offered as AFST 393, HSTY 393, HSTY 493, and ETHS 393. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
AFST 399	Advanced Readings in Black History	3 Units	This is an advanced readings course that may change from semester to semester.  This course will provide students with an opportunity to more deeply explore special themes and theoretical issues in the field of black history that are often quickly and briefly covered in broad survey courses.  Readings may be organized around specific topics such as resistance and social protest, black intellectual history, black nationalism and identity, black film and historical literacy black cultural forms and politics, black urban history, or some such other combination.  Students may take this course more than once and receive credit as long as the course topic differs.  Students should contact the History Department for more details on course content during any given semester.   Offered as AFST 399, ETHS 391, HSTY 399 and HSTY 499.
ARAB 101	Beginning Arabic I	4 Units	The course introduces learners of Arabic to the sound and writing systems of this language and provides them with basic structural and lexical knowledge to enable them to say things in Arabic, such as greeting others, thanking someone, introducing oneself, describing one's background, seeking and providing info and so forth.  The ability to perform these language functions in real-life or lifelike situations is developed by engaging the learner in structured functional activities and grammatical exercises.
ARAB 102	Beginning Arabic II	4 Units	ARAB 102 builds on the proficiency that students should have acquired in ARAB 101. The course follows a student-centered communicative approach in which class time is used in active learning through pair or group activities, role-play, games, selective listening and reading and other activities. The course emphasizes the four basic skills, reading, speaking, listening and writing. Students will be exposed to real audiovisual material in order to enhance comprehension and they will have to develop short oral and written responses about it. Aspects of culture across the Arab world will be included as an element of learning the language. Recommended preparation: ARAB 101
ARAB 201	Intermediate Arabic I	4 Units	Intensive review of grammar and conversational skills in modern Arabic through readings, discussions and other activities that explore contemporary Arab life and culture. Recommended preparation: ARAB 102 or equivalent.
ARAB 202	Intermediate Arabic II	4 Units	ARAB 202 is a continuation of ARAB 201 and will enable the students to develop advanced communicative skills for the use of Modern Arabic. It will focus on speaking, listening, reading and writing skills, and emphasize creative use of the language.  Recommended preparation: ARAB 201 or equivalent.
ARAB 301	Advanced Arabic I	3 Units	This is a higher level of Arabic study.  The course objectives are to enhance the student's language skills and to develop ability to use high-level Arabic effectively.  It is designed to help students move from the intermediate level of proficiency, which centers on daily life and the immediate world, to the advanced, which broadens to include topics of general and professional interest.  Recommended preparation: ARAB 202 or equivalent.
ARAB 303	Multicultural Spain	Christian, Jewish and Muslim Coexistence	3 Units	Why is Medieval Iberia so often depicted as an example of tolerant multiculturalism? What constituted tolerance in the Middle Ages?  In what sense can we speak of medieval multiculturalism? Is Americo Castro's optimistic model of convivencia (coexistence) valid, or is Brian Catlos' idea of conveniencia (convenience) more accurate? In this course we will study cultural theory, medieval and modern historiography, and literature from medieval Castile to the present to approach an understanding of Medieval Iberian 'multiculturalism.'   This class will allow students to get in contact with the history of Spain through the study of the presence and influence of the Roman Empire, the Jewish and Muslim cultures and religions in the Peninsula. Through literature, cinema and art students will learn how the Spanish civilization and culture developed through the years.  The class will be offered during a regular semester, with a study abroad component at the end of it. Students will receive a handout about how to prepare for the class abroad. Offered as ARAB 303 and RLGN 303 and SPAN 301. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARAB 337	Women in the Arab World	3 Units	The purpose of this course is twofold: It is a course that allows students an in-depth look at the diverse women who represent a number of cultures in the Arab world in nations from the Mashrek to the Maghreb. The second primary goal of the course is to study such women through the eyes of leading Arab women theorists who have made an impact not only in their own countries, but also on disciplines intersecting with women's studies worldwide. We will study the Arab woman's place in her respective society, in political and economic systems, in education, and in the family. We will also analyze her contributions to art and literature as well as to the sciences. The course will provide an overview of the Arab woman throughout history, from her origins to her place within recent movements within the Arab Spring and other current world events. As Arab women are Muslim, Christian, and Jewish, views of women within these major world religions will also be taken into account as we study the Arab woman as well as religion's impact on culture in the Middle East and in the Maghreb in particular. In the course, we will utilize theoretical texts, but also case studies as well as examples from media and the arts. During the semester, we will take advantage of teleconferencing opportunities between CWRU and two major academic units for Women's Studies in the Arab world: The Institute for Women's Studies in the Arab World (IWSAW) in Beirut, Lebanon, and the University of Jordan's Center for Women's Studies in Amman. Offered as FRCH 337, FRCH 437, ARAB 337, ETHS 337 and WGST 337. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARAB 349	The Arab World Experience	3 Units	Taught and led by Case faculty, The Arab World Experience is a spring semester course with a spring break study abroad component in a Middle Eastern or North African country supplemented by course meetings before and after travel. It will rotate among countries such as Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, etc. and be taught by faculty with appropriate area expertise in Arabic, Women's and Gender Studies, and/or Ethnic Studies. The course focuses on topics such as history, politics, culture, and gender relations within the society of study. Workload and learning outcomes are commensurate with a semester-long three credit hour course. Guest lectures in the host country are an important component of the course as they bring a fresh, authentic perspective to the aforementioned topics discussed. There will be three three-hour meetings prior to travel, required reading, and one three-hour meeting after travel. In the host country, students will spend seven days (five-eight hours per day) in seminars, discussions, and site visits. Student grades are determined on the basis of participation, attendance, a daily experiential learning journal, interviews with guest speakers, and a final exam. Offered as ARAB 349, ETHS 349 and WGST 349. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARAB 399	Independent Study in Arabic	1 - 3 Units	Topics will be constructed to fit the interest of a student who has already taken an advanced course in Arabic. Prereq: ARAB 301.
LDRS 101	Collaborative Practice I A	1.5 Unit	Interprofessional Education (IPE) occurs "when students or members of two or more professions learn with, from and about each other to improve collaboration and the quality of care" (CAIPE 1997, revised 2013). Through IPE, students develop the knowledge, skills and attitudes needed to prepare them for interprofessional collaboration, defined by the WHO as "when multiple health workers from different professional backgrounds work together with patients, families, carers (caregivers), and communities to deliver the highest quality of care." Over the last decade there has been a growing emphasis on developing the ability of all professionals to more effectively communicate and collaborate in the care of individuals, families, communities and populations in order to achieve the triple aim: enhancement of the patient or client experience, improvement in population health outcomes, and delivering more cost-effective care. With the triple aim in mind, Collaborative Practice I focuses on the domain of interprofessional collaboration. In addition to serving individuals, in this domain healthcare and partner professionals collaborate using population health and community engagement approaches in order to improve the health and well-being of individuals, families, communities, and populations. Therefore, students in this interprofessional service learning experience will learn teamwork skills through active participation in an authentic and meaningful community-based project that is focused on health and well-being for individuals, families, communities, or populations.  Collaborative Practice I serves as an introductory IPE experience for dental, genetic counseling, medical, nursing, nutrition, physician assistant, psychology, social work and speech-language pathology students at CWRU. Depending on the School and program, the Collaborative Practice I experience is a free-standing course or integrated into one or more courses, blocks, rotations, etc. By the end of the experience, students will have acquired basic readiness to participate in subsequent interprofessional collaborative experiences.
LDRS 102	Collaborative Practice I B	1.5 Unit	Interprofessional Education (IPE) occurs "when students or members of two or more professions learn with, from and about each other to improve collaboration and the quality of care" (CAIPE 1997, revised 2013). Through IPE, students develop the knowledge, skills and attitudes needed to prepare them for interprofessional collaboration, defined by the WHO as "when multiple health workers from different professional backgrounds work together with patients, families, carers (caregivers), and communities to deliver the highest quality of care." Over the last decade there has been a growing emphasis on developing the ability of all professionals to more effectively communicate and collaborate in the care of individuals, families, communities and populations in order to achieve the triple aim: enhancement of the patient or client experience, improvement in population health outcomes, and delivering more cost-effective care. With the triple aim in mind, Collaborative Practice I focuses on the domain of interprofessional collaboration. In addition to serving individuals, in this domain healthcare and partner professionals collaborate using population health and community engagement approaches in order to improve the health and well-being of individuals, families, communities, and populations. Therefore, students in this interprofessional service learning experience will learn teamwork skills through active participation in an authentic and meaningful community-based project that is focused on health and well-being for individuals, families, communities, or populations.  Collaborative Practice I serves as an introductory IPE experience for dental, genetic counseling, medical, nursing, nutrition, physician assistant, psychology, social work and speech-language pathology students at CWRU. Depending on the School and program, the Collaborative Practice I experience is a free-standing course or integrated into one or more courses, blocks, rotations, etc. By the end of the experience, students will have acquired basic readiness to participate in subsequent interprofessional collaborative experiences.
LDRS 111	Epidemiology for Public Health and Clinical Practice	2.5 Units	This 3-week intensive sequence provides the first experience with the problem-based learning format and focuses on foundational knowledge in epidemiology for evidence-based practice in dentistry. Problem-based cases will use oral health topics to demonstrate the skills for critical appraisal of the health literature. Large-group lectures will present the foundational knowledge; small-group settings will permit students to gain experience in applying these skills to relevant dental literature.
LDRS 116	Promoting Evidence-based Dentistry I	.5 Unit	The course will present advanced topics in oral health epidemiology and research to enhance skills for critical appraisal of the oral health literature and facilitate the use of evidence-based decision making skills and critical thinking during D1 in preparation for use in clinical training.   The course will build on topics in LDRS 111. Using diverse formats, students will enhance their skills to be efficient and effective in acquiring, appraising and applying scientific evidence.  The course topics will address concomitant coursework to enhance relevance.  A large-group lecture will present the foundational knowledge; faculty facilitated small-group discussions will permit students to gain experience in applying these skills to relevant dental literature. Student assignments can be included in a portfolio to demonstrate progress towards competency.
LDRS 118	Ergonomics	.5 Unit	This course introduces students to the principles and implementation of ergonomics in dentistry.
LDRS 310	Professional Development	1 Unit	This course focuses on behavioral knowledge, skills, and attitudes the student-dentist will require to be effective in the delivery of patient-centered oral health care. Concepts introduced in the course INQU 102: Knowing the Patient are extended and built upon in the areas of communication skills, health promotion and health behavior change, ethics, and management of a diverse patient population. Instruction in the assessment and management of dental fear and anxiety is also included. This course will utilize a blended learning format, with a combination of on-line instructional videos and readings, in-class sessions, assignments and a simulated patient exercise.
LDRS 313	Dental Patient Management/Risk Management	1 Unit	Principles of patient management and risk management are reviewed. The primary focus is directed toward the skills associated with communication. A variety of examples of malpractice are reviewed and discussed. Other areas of risk are discussed such as infection and occupational hazards related to EPA and OSHA standards.
LDRS 316	Practice Management I	1 Unit	This course is designed to develop practical knowledge and skills in dental practice management. As the student prepares for clinical practice, topics surrounding negotiation of working contracts, insurance contract evaluation, policies, compliance, and marketing are among some of the most important issues to be familiar with. The course will take a third year dental through the starting process of running a dental office and preparing them to write a business plan.
LDRS 317	Dental Auxiliary Management	.5 Unit	This course introduces students to each type of auxiliary personnel in the dental office and describes their training, testing, duties delegated legally and how their utilization in the office setting can be optimized.  Basic management considerations and theories of leadership are presented and various leadership styles are recommended for situations presented. This course provides an understanding of interacting with auxiliary and the process of delegation. The course defines state dental board rules and regulations that guide dentists in the utilization of auxiliary personnel. Such items as overhead costs are explored in relation to each auxiliary category. Information is presented on the implementation of the resultant delivery systems including ergonomics and scheduling initiatives.
LDRS 415	Practice Management II	1.5 Unit	Practice Management II is entirely focused on each student producing his or her business plan by researching a potential area where they intend to practice. The business plan is constructed from the results of research done to complete homework for each session. Student findings serve as the basis for discussion and sharing of ideas to aid each student in improving their business plan.
LDRS 416	Practice Management III	1.5 Unit	This course is designed to develop practical knowledge and skills in dental practice management. As the student prepares for clinical practice, topics surrounding negotiation of working contracts, insurance contract evaluation, policies, compliance, and marketing are among some of the most important issues to be familiar with. The course will take a fourth year dental student from start to finish of owning and running a successful dental practice.
LDRS 420	Jurisprudence and Professional Ethical Responsibility	.5 Unit	The didactic curriculum provides historical background as well as current tools needed to be able to make sound ethical and legal decisions for clinical practice.
LING 301	Second Language Acquisition I	3 Units	This course is an introduction to the growing field of second language acquisition (SLA). SLA seeks to understand the linguistic, psychological and social processes that underlie the learning and use of second language(s). The goal of research is to identify the principles and processes that govern second language learning and use. SLA is approached from three perspectives in the course:  1) as linguistic knowledge;2) as a cognitive skill; and 3) as a socially and personality-meditated process. Important factors in second language learning will be identified and discussed. These include: age-related differences, the influence of the first language, the role played by innate (universal) principles, the role of memory processes, attitudes, motivation, personality and cognitive styles, and formal versus naturalistic learning contexts. The objective of this course is to survey the principal research in second language acquisition. Students will become familiar with the major research issues through their reading of both primary and secondary sources, as well as through lectures and class discussions. Offered as COGS 312, COGS 412, LING 301 and LING 401.
LING 302	Second Language Acquisition II: Second Language Acquisition Research and Second Language Teaching	3 Units	This course will examine various issues in second language acquisition research that are particularly relevant to foreign language teaching and learning.  Topics covered will include: the role of input (listening/reading) vs. output (speaking/writing); implicit vs. explicit learning; negative vs. positive evidence (including the role of error correction); affective factors (motivation, anxiety); individual differences; teachability hypothesis and syllabus construction, program design/evaluation, language testing, among others.  The purpose of this course is to survey the principal research in the acquisition of second language that is relevant to second language teaching in a classroom setting, and to obtain the state-of-the-art knowledge of the SLA research literature that is relevant to L2 teaching.  The focus is not necessarily on the practical application of the SLA research, although we will not exclude discussion of classroom application.  Rather, we critically examine and evaluate SLA research and come up with our own syntheses with respect to various issues.  To achieve this goal, we should ask following questions in reading and discussing the relevant literature:  1) What are the main claims that the author(s) make(s)?  2) Are the author's claims sound?  If not why?  3) What further research is needed to answer remaining questions?  Students will become familiar with the major research issues through their reading of both primary and secondary sources, as well as through lectures and class discussions.  The students are required to complete a term project that addresses the issues treated in the course.  Offered as LING 302, LING 402, COGS 314 and COGS 414. Prereq: LING 301 or requisites not met permission.
LING 309	Introduction to Applied Linguistics	3 Units	This course provides students with answers to the question, "Linguistics? What can you do with that?" We will survey the ways that linguistics has been used (i.e. applied) to solve 'real world' problems. Some of these, like computational linguistics and the teaching of language, are intimately involved in language, even though they do not necessarily concern themselves with linguistic theory. Others, such as language and the law, use linguistics as a tool to do their work. We will be concerned with understanding the various ways that linguistic inquiries have been used or neglected, and also with the implications of applied fields for linguistic theories. Offered as LING 309, LING 409, COGS 331 and COGS 431. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
LING 335	Japanese Linguistics	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to survey the principal research in Japanese linguistics for students who have basic knowledge of Japanese and are interested in more in-depth treatment of linguistic phenomena (phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, etc.). Lectures and discussions will cover many different aspects of the Japanese language. There is a great deal of analytic studies of the Japanese language done both inside and outside Japan, which will be surveyed in this course.  Students will become familiar with the major issues through lectures and class discussions, as well as through their reading of both primary and secondary sources. Both formal and functional approaches to the analysis of Japanese will be examined, and the acquisition of these structures will also be discussed. The course will also be useful for the improvement of students' Japanese language proficiency.  Recommended preparation: JAPN 101 and JAPN 102, or equivalent competence in Japanese. Offered as COGS 335, COGS 435, JAPN 435, LING 335 and LING 435. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
LING 401	Second Language Acquisition I	3 Units	This course is an introduction to the growing field of second language acquisition (SLA). SLA seeks to understand the linguistic, psychological and social processes that underlie the learning and use of second language(s). The goal of research is to identify the principles and processes that govern second language learning and use. SLA is approached from three perspectives in the course:  1) as linguistic knowledge;2) as a cognitive skill; and 3) as a socially and personality-meditated process. Important factors in second language learning will be identified and discussed. These include: age-related differences, the influence of the first language, the role played by innate (universal) principles, the role of memory processes, attitudes, motivation, personality and cognitive styles, and formal versus naturalistic learning contexts. The objective of this course is to survey the principal research in second language acquisition. Students will become familiar with the major research issues through their reading of both primary and secondary sources, as well as through lectures and class discussions. Offered as COGS 312, COGS 412, LING 301 and LING 401.
LING 402	Second Language Acquisition II: Second Language Acquisition Research and Second Language Teaching	3 Units	This course will examine various issues in second language acquisition research that are particularly relevant to foreign language teaching and learning.  Topics covered will include: the role of input (listening/reading) vs. output (speaking/writing); implicit vs. explicit learning; negative vs. positive evidence (including the role of error correction); affective factors (motivation, anxiety); individual differences; teachability hypothesis and syllabus construction, program design/evaluation, language testing, among others.  The purpose of this course is to survey the principal research in the acquisition of second language that is relevant to second language teaching in a classroom setting, and to obtain the state-of-the-art knowledge of the SLA research literature that is relevant to L2 teaching.  The focus is not necessarily on the practical application of the SLA research, although we will not exclude discussion of classroom application.  Rather, we critically examine and evaluate SLA research and come up with our own syntheses with respect to various issues.  To achieve this goal, we should ask following questions in reading and discussing the relevant literature:  1) What are the main claims that the author(s) make(s)?  2) Are the author's claims sound?  If not why?  3) What further research is needed to answer remaining questions?  Students will become familiar with the major research issues through their reading of both primary and secondary sources, as well as through lectures and class discussions.  The students are required to complete a term project that addresses the issues treated in the course.  Offered as LING 302, LING 402, COGS 314 and COGS 414. Prereq: LING 401 or requisites not met permission.
LING 409	Introduction to Applied Linguistics	3 Units	This course provides students with answers to the question, "Linguistics? What can you do with that?" We will survey the ways that linguistics has been used (i.e. applied) to solve 'real world' problems. Some of these, like computational linguistics and the teaching of language, are intimately involved in language, even though they do not necessarily concern themselves with linguistic theory. Others, such as language and the law, use linguistics as a tool to do their work. We will be concerned with understanding the various ways that linguistic inquiries have been used or neglected, and also with the implications of applied fields for linguistic theories. Offered as LING 309, LING 409, COGS 331 and COGS 431. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
LING 435	Japanese Linguistics	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to survey the principal research in Japanese linguistics for students who have basic knowledge of Japanese and are interested in more in-depth treatment of linguistic phenomena (phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, etc.). Lectures and discussions will cover many different aspects of the Japanese language. There is a great deal of analytic studies of the Japanese language done both inside and outside Japan, which will be surveyed in this course.  Students will become familiar with the major issues through lectures and class discussions, as well as through their reading of both primary and secondary sources. Both formal and functional approaches to the analysis of Japanese will be examined, and the acquisition of these structures will also be discussed. The course will also be useful for the improvement of students' Japanese language proficiency.  Recommended preparation: JAPN 101 and JAPN 102, or equivalent competence in Japanese. Offered as COGS 335, COGS 435, JAPN 435, LING 335 and LING 435. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
EMAC 125	First Year Research on Polymers	1 Unit	First year research in polymer chemistry, engineering, and physics. Students will be placed in active research groups and will participate in real research projects under the supervision of graduate students and faculty mentors.
EMAC 270	Introduction to Polymer Science and Engineering	3 Units	Science and engineering of large molecules. Correlation of molecular structure and properties of polymers in solution and in bulk. Control of significant structural variables in polymer synthesis. Analysis of physical methods for characterization of molecular weight, morphology, rheology, and mechanical behavior. Prereq: ENGR 145.
EMAC 276	Polymer Properties and Design	3 Units	The course reviews chemical and physical structures of a wide range of applications for synthetic and natural polymers, and addresses "Which polymer do we choose for a specific application and why?" We examine the polymer properties, the way that these depend on the chemical and physical structures, and reviews how they are processed. We aim to understand the advantages and disadvantages of the different chemical options and why the actual polymers that are used commercially are the best available in terms of properties, processibility and cost. The requirements include two written assignments and one oral presentation. Prereq: ENGR 145 and EMAC 270.
EMAC 303	Structure of Biological Materials	3 Units	Structure of proteins, nucleic acids, connective tissue and bone, from molecular to microscopic levels.  An introduction to bioengineering biological materials and biomimetic materials, and an understanding of how different instruments may be used for imaging, identification and characterization of biological materials. Recommended preparation: EMAC 270. Offered as: EBME 303 and EMAC 303. Prereq: EBME 201, EBME 202, and EBME 306.
EMAC 325	Undergraduate Research in Polymer Science	1 - 3 Units	Undergraduate laboratory research in polymer chemistry/physics/engineering. Students will undertake an independent research project, working under the mentoring of both a graduate student and a faculty member. A mid-term written progress report is required. A written report and oral presentation will be made at the end of the semester. Can be taken for 1-3 credits per semester, up to a total of 6 credit hours. Students are expected to spend approximately 5 hours/week in the laboratory per credit registered each semester. Recommended preparation: Sophomore/Junior standing and consent of instructor.
EMAC 351	Physical Chemistry for Engineering	3 Units	Principles of physical chemistry and their application to systems involving physical and chemical transformations. The nature of physical chemistry, properties of gases, overview of the laws of thermodynamics, thermochemistry, solutions, phases and chemical equilibrium, kinetics of chemical reaction, solutions of electrolytes and introduction to quantum mechanics, atomic structure and molecular statistics. Prereq: ENGR 145.
EMAC 352	Polymer Physics and Engineering	3 Units	Single chain statistics and thermodynamics of dilute polymer solutions (single chain statistics, Flory-Kringbaum theory, vapor pressure and osmotic pressure, light, small angle X-Ray, and small-angle neutron scattering), solid state properties of polymers (polymer viscoelasticity (time-temperature superposition; rubber thermodynamics and statistics), glasses and related mechanical properties (fracture mechanism), crystals and liquid crystals; structure property relationship, polymer blends, block copolymers and composites, transport phenomena (conversation of mass, momentum and energy, differential forms, integral forms, momentum transport, laminar and turbulent flow, Navier-Stokes equation, mass transport, diffusion, Fick's law) and transport phenomena of polymer solutions (intrinsic viscosity, sedimentation and diffusion, dynamic light scattering, polyelectrolytes and block copolymers in solution, size exclusion chromatography). Prereq: EMAC 351
EMAC 353	Foundations of Scattering	3 Units	Introduction to the fundamentals of using scattering techniques to characterize the structure and dynamics of soft matter and its interfaces, with an emphasis on X-ray and neutron techniques. Topics covered include a mechanistic description of scattering processes, diffraction, small-angle scattering, reflectometry, and quasi-elastic scattering applied to polymers, proteins, gels/networks, nanoparticles, and other soft materials. Offered as EMAC 353 and EMAC 453. Prereq: EMAC 351 and EMAC 352.
EMAC 355	Polymer Analysis Laboratory	3 Units	Experimental techniques in polymer synthesis and characterization. Synthesis by a variety of polymerization mechanisms. Quantitative investigation of polymer structure by spectroscopy, diffraction and microscopy.  Molecular weight determination.  Physical properties. Prereq: EMAC 276 and (CHEM 290 or CHEM 322).
EMAC 370	Polymer Chemistry	3 Units	The fundamentals of organic chemistry of polymer synthesis, suitable for laboratory and industrial polymer production. Prereq: EMAC 270 and (CHEM 224 or CHEM 324).
EMAC 372	Polymer Processing and Testing Laboratory	3 Units	Basic techniques for the rheological characterization of thermoplastic and thermoset resins; "hands-on" experience with the equipment used in polymer processing methods such as extrusion, injection molding, compression molding; techniques for mechanical characterization and basic principles of statistical quality control. Prereq: EMAC 377.
EMAC 375	Fundamentals of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics and Polymer Rheology	3 Units	This course will involve the study of Rheology from the perspectives of rheological property measurement, phenomenological and molecular models, and applicability to polymer processing.  In particular, students will be introduced to:1) General concepts of Rheology and Newtonian Fluid Mechanics, 2) Standard flows and material functions; 3) The role of Rheology as a structural characterization tool, with an emphasis on polymeric systems; 4) Experimental methods in Rheology with quantitative descriptions of associated flows and data analyses; 5) Viscoelasticity and Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics, including the application of models, both phenomenological and molecular, to the prediction of rheological behavior and extraction of model parameters from real data sets; and 6) The relevance of rheological behavior of different systems to practical processing schemes, particularly with respect to plastics manufacturing. Offered as EMAC 375 and EMAC 475. Prereq: ENGR 225 or EMAC 404.
EMAC 376	Polymer Engineering	3 Units	Mechanical properties of polymer materials as related to polymer structure and composition. Visco-elastic behavior, yielding and fracture behavior including irreversible deformation processes. Recommended preparation: ENGR 200. Offered as EMAC 376 and EMAC 476. Prereq: EMAC 276.
EMAC 377	Polymer Processing	3 Units	Application of the principles of fluid mechanics, heat transfer and mass transfer to problems in polymer processing; elementary steps in polymer processing (handling of particulate solids, melting, pressurization and pumping, mixing); principles and procedures for extrusion, injection molding, reaction injection molding, secondary shaping. Prereq: EMAC 352 or ENGR 225.
EMAC 378	Polymer Engineer Design Product	3 Units	Uses material taught in previous and concurrent courses in an integrated fashion to solve polymer product design problems.  Practicality, external requirements, economics, thermal/mechanical properties, processing and fabrication issues, decision making with uncertainty, and proposal and report preparation are all stressed.  Several small exercises and one comprehensive process design project will be carried out by class members.  Offered as EMAC 378 and EMAC 478. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
EMAC 396	Special Topics	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
EMAC 398	Polymer Science and Engineering Project I	1 - 3 Units	(Senior project). Research under the guidance of faculty. Requirements include periodic reporting of progress, plus a final oral presentation and written report. Repeatable up to 3 credit hours. When taken for 3 credits it may be spread over two successive semesters. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: Senior Standing.
EMAC 399	Polymer Science and Engineering Project II	1 - 9 Units	(Senior project.)  Research under the guidance of staff, culminating in thesis. Recommended preparation: Majors only and senior standing.
EMAC 400T	Graduate Teaching I	0 Unit	This course will engage the Ph.D. students in teaching experiences that will include non-contact (such as preparation and grading of homeworks and tests) and direct contact (leading recitations and monitoring laboratory works, lectures and office hours) activities.  The teaching experience will be conducted under the supervision of the faculty.  All Ph.D. students will be expected to perform direct contact teaching during the course sequence.  The proposed teaching experiences for EMAC Ph.D. students are outlined below in association with undergraduate classes.  The individual assignments will depend on the specialization of the students.  The activities include grading, recitation, lab supervision and guest lecturing. Recommended preparation: Ph.D. student in Macromolecular Science.
EMAC 401	Polymer Foundation Course I: Organic Chemistry	3 Units	The class is an introduction to the synthesis and organic chemistry of macromolecules.  The course introduces the most important polymerization reactions, focusing on their reaction mechanisms and kinetic aspects.  Topics include free radical and ionic chain polymerization, condensation (step-growth) polymerization, ring-opening, insertion and controlled addition polymerization.  There is no limit on the number of students for the class as a whole.
EMAC 402	Polymer Foundation Course II: Physical Chemistry	3 Units	This class is an introduction to the physical chemistry of polymers in solution.  Topics include: polymer statistics: (microstructure, chain configuration, and chain dimensions), thermodynamics and transport properties of polymers in solution, methods for molecular weight determination, physical chemistry of water-soluble polymers, and characterization of polymer microstructure (IR and NMR).  There is no limit on the number of students for the class as a whole.
EMAC 403	Polymer Foundation Course III: Physics	3 Units	This class is an introduction to the physics of polymers in the bulk amorphous and crystalline states.  Topics include: structural and morphological analysis using X-ray diffraction, electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy, characterization of thermal transitions, viscoelastic behavior and rubber elasticity, and dynamic mechanical analysis.  There is no limit on the number of students for the class as a whole.
EMAC 404	Polymer Foundation Course IV: Engineering	3 Units	This class is an introduction to the engineering and technology of polymeric materials.  Topics include: additives, blends and composites, natural polymers and fivers, thermoplastics, elastomers, and thermosets, polymer degradation and stability, polymers in the environment, polymer rheology and polymer processing, and polymers for advanced technologies (membrane science, biomedical engineering,  applications in electronics, photonic polymers).  There is no limit on the number of students for the class as a whole.
EMAC 405	Polymer Characterization Laboratory	3 Units	Laboratory experience through synthesis and characterization of polymers.  Synthesis via addition and condensation polymerization.  Characterization methods include size exclusion chromatography, infrared and NMR spectroscopy.  Solid samples are characterized by x-ray diffraction, electron microscopy, thermal analysis, and physical properties.  Fluid samples are characterized by melt rheology. Prereq: EMAC 401, EMAC 402, EMAC 403 and EMAC 404.
EMAC 413	Polymers Plus Green Chemistry and Engineering	2 Units	This course focuses on green chemistry and engineering, particularly as it relates to polymers.  Specific topics to be covered in this course will include green chemistry, catalysis, alternative solvents, green processing, renewable materials, and life cycle analysis.  Case studies will be utilized to connect lecture topics to real-world examples. Prereq: EMAC 401 and EMAC 404.
EMAC 415	Polymers Plus Structure and Morphology	2 Units	This special topic focuses on polymer structure and morphology and their applications.  Topics include solid-state physics of various polymeric materials, ranging from crystalline polymers to liquid crystalline polymers, and block copolymers.  First, symmetry operation, space groups, reciprocal spaces are introduced.  Examples of the crystalline structures of industrially important polymers and typical polymer crystalline morphology such as lamellar and spherulitic crystals are discussed.  Defects in crystalline polymer is also an important issue that determines their physical properties.  Second, typical phase structure and transitions of liquid crystals and liquid crystalline polymers are introduced, including both thermotropic and lyotropic liquid crystals.  Finally, nanostructure and morphology of block copolymers are discussed. Prereq: EMAC 402 and EMAC 403.
EMAC 422	Polymers Plus Microscopy	2 Units	This course focuses on application of microscopy techniques to the analysis of the microstructure of polymeric materials.  Specifically, atomic force microscopy, transmission and scanning electron microscopy, and optical microscopy will be discussed.  Practical aspects of these techniques will be applied to a variety of systems, including block copolymers, nanocomposites, LC polymers, and multi-layered films. Prereq: EMAC 403.
EMAC 426	Biopolymers: Structure, Synthesis, and Application in Medicine	2 Units	An introduction to biomacromolecules including DNA, RNA, and proteins.  The course will deal with the synthesis and manipulation of biological and synthetic macromolecules as it applies to topics in modern medicine.  Topics covered will include nanoparticle gene and drug delivery systems, polymer hydrogels, polymer imaging agents, and protein-polymer conjugates.  The purpose of this course is to provide a survey of important areas in medicine where a polymer chemist/engineer can intervene to make a meaningful contribution. Prereq: CHEM 323 and CHEM 324.
EMAC 437	Advanced Polymeric Films	2 Units	This course is focused on processing structure and property relationships with particular emphasis on a variety of layered film systems.  Two classes will be offered per week, emphasizing a large variety of layered film systems for advanced applications.  These film systems exhibit unique properties that allow applications in 1) selective barrier films for food and packaging and flexible photocell protection; 2) optical and photonic characteristics for security-enhanced devices and systems; 3) transport phenomena and separation processes for battery separators and particle separation; and, 4) multilayer films for enhancement of mechanical and adhesive properties. Prereq: EMAC 270 and EMAC 276 or Requisites Not Met permission.
EMAC 450	The Business of Polymers	2 Units	This course will link polymer technology to business and management issues that need to be considered for successful technology commercialization.  Topics include project management, finance, opportunity assessment, the voice of the customer, and protection of intellectual property. Case studies from both large and small companies will be used to illustrate key concepts.  Recommended preparation: EMAC 270, EMAC 276.
EMAC 453	Foundations of Scattering	3 Units	Introduction to the fundamentals of using scattering techniques to characterize the structure and dynamics of soft matter and its interfaces, with an emphasis on X-ray and neutron techniques. Topics covered include a mechanistic description of scattering processes, diffraction, small-angle scattering, reflectometry, and quasi-elastic scattering applied to polymers, proteins, gels/networks, nanoparticles, and other soft materials. Offered as EMAC 353 and EMAC 453. Prereq: EMAC 402 and EMAC 403.
EMAC 461	Chemistry of Fire Safe Polymers and Composites	3 Units	Chemistry of Fire Safe Polymers and Composites starts with the introduction of characterization techniques used for fire safe materials and combustion phenomena research.  General discussion on how reduced flammability of polymers and composites are obtained, for example by additives and preparing intrinsically thermally stable chemical structure and some examples of smart approaches, will be discussed.  It also discusses the synthetic methods of preparing high temperature stable polymers in addition to the raw materials used to prepare those materials.  Special emphasis will be placed on the thermal stability data obtained by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and combustion calorimetry for those fire safe materials.  Mechanistic aspects of the flammability of polymers will be explained with special emphasis on the molar contribution of chemical functionality to the heat release capacity.  Theoretical derivation of thermokinetic parameters will be explained.  In addition, a common sense build-up will be attempted by providing actual numbers associated with those thermokinetic parameters.  Upon completion of background formation, a more advanced materials, composites and nanocomposites, will be discussed using the results recently reported.  Preliminary attempts to explain flame retardation by nanocomposite structures will also be discussed. Offered as EMAC 461 and EMAE 461.
EMAC 463	Fire Dynamics	3 Units	This course introduces compartment fires and burning behavior of materials. Topics include: buoyant driven flow, fire plume, ceiling jet, vent flow, flashover and smoke movement as well as steady burning of liquids and solids; ignition, extinction and flame spread over solids. Recommended Preparation: Elementary knowledge in thermo-fluids is required. Offered as EMAE 463 and EMAC 463.
EMAC 464	Fire Protection Engineering	3 Units	This course introduces essentials of fire protection in industry and houses. Topics include: hazard identification (release of flammable gases and their dispersion), fire and explosion hazards, prevention and risk mitigation, fire detection systems, mechanisms of fire extinguishment, evaluation of fire extinguishing agents and systems. Offered as EMAC 464 and EMAE 464.
EMAC 471	Polymers in Medicine	3 Units	This course covers the important fundamentals and applications of polymers in medicine, and consists of three major components: (i) the blood and soft-tissue reactions to polymer implants; (ii) the structure, characterization and modification of biomedical polymers; and (iii) the application of polymers in a broad range of cardiovascular and extravascular devices.  The chemical and physical characteristics of biomedical polymers and the properties required to meet the needs of the intended biological function will be presented.  Clinical evaluation, including recent advances and current problems associated with different polymer implants.  Recommended preparation: EBME 306 or equivalent. Offered as EBME 406 and EMAC 471.
EMAC 475	Fundamentals of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics and Polymer Rheology	3 Units	This course will involve the study of Rheology from the perspectives of rheological property measurement, phenomenological and molecular models, and applicability to polymer processing.  In particular, students will be introduced to:1) General concepts of Rheology and Newtonian Fluid Mechanics, 2) Standard flows and material functions; 3) The role of Rheology as a structural characterization tool, with an emphasis on polymeric systems; 4) Experimental methods in Rheology with quantitative descriptions of associated flows and data analyses; 5) Viscoelasticity and Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics, including the application of models, both phenomenological and molecular, to the prediction of rheological behavior and extraction of model parameters from real data sets; and 6) The relevance of rheological behavior of different systems to practical processing schemes, particularly with respect to plastics manufacturing. Offered as EMAC 375 and EMAC 475. Prereq: ENGR 225 or EMAC 404.
EMAC 476	Polymer Engineering	3 Units	Mechanical properties of polymer materials as related to polymer structure and composition. Visco-elastic behavior, yielding and fracture behavior including irreversible deformation processes. Recommended preparation: ENGR 200. Offered as EMAC 376 and EMAC 476.
EMAC 477	Elementary Steps in Polymer Processing	3 Units	This course is an application of principles of fluid mechanics and heat transfer to problems in polymer processing.  In the first part of the course, basic principles of transport phenomena will be reviewed.  In the second part, the elementary steps in polymer processing will be described and analyzed with application to a single screw extruder.
EMAC 478	Polymer Engineer Design Product	3 Units	Uses material taught in previous and concurrent courses in an integrated fashion to solve polymer product design problems.  Practicality, external requirements, economics, thermal/mechanical properties, processing and fabrication issues, decision making with uncertainty, and proposal and report preparation are all stressed.  Several small exercises and one comprehensive process design project will be carried out by class members.  Offered as EMAC 378 and EMAC 478. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
EMAC 491	Polymers Plus Literature Review	1 Unit	This course involves weekly presentations of the current polymer literature. It involves at least one presentation by the enrolled student and participation in all literature reviews (at least 10/semester). The course will focus on presentation skills (both oral and written), scientific interpretation, and development of peer-review skills. This course can be taken for a total of 3 credits over three different semesters.
EMAC 500T	Graduate Teaching II	0 Unit	This course will engage the Ph.D. students in teaching experiences that will include non-contact (such as preparation and grading of homework and tests) and direct contact (leading recitations and monitoring laboratory works, lectures and office hours) activities.  The teaching experience will be conducted under the supervision of the faculty.  All Ph.D. students will be expected to perform direct contact teaching during the course sequence.  The proposed teaching experiences for EMAC Ph.D. students are outlined below in association with graduate classes.  The individual assignments will depend on the specialization of the students.  The activities include grading, recitation, lab supervision and guest lecturing. Recommended preparation: Ph.D. student in Macromolecular Science.
EMAC 600T	Graduate Teaching III	0 Unit	This course will engage the Ph.D. students in teaching experiences that will include non-contact and direct contact activities. The teaching experience will be conducted under the supervision of the faculty.  The proposed teaching experiences for EMAC Ph.D. student in this course involve instruction in the operation of major instrumentation and equipment used in the daily research activities.  The individual assignments will depend on the specialization of the students. Recommended preparation: Ph.D. student in Macromolecular Science.
EMAC 601	Independent Study	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
EMAC 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
EMAC 673	Selected Topics in Polymer Engineering	2 - 3 Units	Timely issues in polymer engineering are presented at the advanced graduate level. Content varies, but may include: mechanisms of irreversible deformation: failure, fatigue and fracture of polymers and their composites; processing structure-property relationships; and hierarchical design of polymeric systems. Recommended preparation: EMAC 376 or EMAC 476.
EMAC 677	Colloquium in Macromolecular Science and Engineering	0 - 1 Units	Lectures by invited speakers on subjects of current interest in polymer science and engineering.  This course can be taken for 3 credits over three different semesters.
EMAC 690	Special Topics in Macromolecular Science	1 - 18 Units	
EMAC 695	Project M.S.	1 - 9 Units	Research course taken by Plan B M.S. students. Prereq: Enrolled in the EMAC Plan B Program.
EMAC 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
MAHE 141	Preventive Periodontics	1 Unit	This course enables the student to recognize periodontal health and the changes that occur in the transition from health to disease. The didactic component focuses on the scientific basis for prevention of inflammatory periodontal diseases presented in lecture format. The clinical component consists of laboratory and clinical exercises in preventive Periodontics. The course provides practical instruction in how to implement preventive periodontal therapy under direct supervision by faculty.
MAHE 145	ACE: Outreach Preventive Dentistry	2 Units	The didactic portion of the course provides generalized background of dental sealant placement and other preventive procedures. In addition the student will develop the knowledge of ethical dental practice and cultural awareness in preparing to provide care for an underserved population. The lab and clinical portion of the course will establish the student's ability to provide dental sealants with the culminating experience of providing care for children in the Cleveland Metropolitan School District (CMSD) as part of the MAHE 147 clinical course.
MAHE 147	ACE Clinical Outreach Preventive Dentistry	2 Units	The student will have the opportunity to practice their knowledge of ethical dental practice and cultural awareness while providing care for an under-served population by providing screening and dental sealants for children in the Cleveland Metropolitan School District (CMSD).
MAHE 214	ACE: Family First	1 Unit	The overarching goal of the clinical experience (ACE) is to incorporate the concepts of risk assessment and the importance of the family unit to oral health. The Family First ACE will allow students to explore the interaction between genetic and environmental factors in oral diseases and certain systemic conditions (diabetes, hypertension, and asthma). At the end of the "Family First" rotation the students would have achieved certain didactic and clinical objectives and the experience is linked to the second year didactic courses: Cariology, Periodontology, and Oral Pathology. This experiential learning includes clinical experience, didactic lectures, and small group discussions. Risk assessment for common oral diseases such as caries and periodontal diseases as well as for oral cancer is part of the clinical activities. Students will review the risk assessment and systemic health to delineate genetic and environmental factors through small group discussions.
MAHE 242	Periodontics	1 Unit	The course consists of clinical instruction that provides the student with knowledge of clinical data collection and therapy performed in the management of healthy patients who may have risks for periodontal diseases. Includes discussion on types of risks for progressing periodontal diseases, disease etiology and points of periodontal intervention and diagnosis.
MAHE 340	Nutrition for Dentistry	1 Unit	This course offers instruction in nutrition concepts relevant to the dental professional. Content includes the function of nutrients, their digestion and absorption, and intake recommendations; nutritional status assessment; role of nutrition in the growth and development of oral structures; nutrition and the periodontium; nutrition in immune-compromising conditions and oral lesions; nutrition concerns for the dentally compromised patient; nutrition needs throughout the life cycle; and the role of the dental professional in the nutrition care of patients.
MGMT 1	Supervised Professional Practicum - Semester 1	0 Unit	A professional practicum is a workplace experience, the primary goal of which is the intellectual, personal and professional growth of the student.  It occurs under the sponsorship or supervision of a mentor in the workplace who is committed to seeing that it is an educational as well as a work venture.  It requires skills appropriate to the student's year in college and provides students with new skills, insights and experiences that are transferable back to the academic setting and/or to a future position in the workplace.  (Only available to declared Weatherhead Accounting or Management majors.) Prereq: Junior standing or higher.
MGMT 2	Supervised Professional Practicum - Semester 2	0 Unit	A professional practicum is a workplace experience, the primary goal of which is the intellectual, personal and professional growth of the student.  It occurs under the sponsorship or supervision of a mentor in the workplace who is committed to seeing that it is an educational as well as a work venture.  It requires skills appropriate to the student's year in college and provides students with new skills, insights and experiences that are transferable back to the academic setting and/or to a future position in the workplace.  (Only available to declared Weatherhead Accounting or Management majors.) Prereq: Junior standing.
MGMT 201	Contemporary Business and Communication	3 Units	This course is designed to survey business topics, issues, and practices.  Students will be introduced to each of the functional areas of business, including accounting, finance, marketing, operations, business intelligence, and human resources management.  The course is designed to help students appreciate the interrelationship of these business functions and, more generally, the role and context of business in society.  Other topics considered include: the economic and legal environment of business, the globalization of markets, workforce diversity, leadership and entrepreneurship.  To convey course content, lectures, in-class discussions, exercises, simulations, and guest speakers are used.  Weekly discussions and a high level of student interaction amplify on class materials and concepts by focusing on contemporary issues of actual businesses.
MGMT 205	Essentials of Personal Finance	1 Unit	This course will provide students of all disciplines with an essential foundation in personal finance.   The course will focus on four core areas of personal finance: 1) Budgeting & saving, 2) Investing, 3) Obtaining credit & controlling debt, and 4) Minimizing financial risk through the use of insurance.   The course will also cover the essentials of personal taxation, retirement planning, and estate planning.  This course will enable students to gain the fundamental knowledge and skills needed to make wise financial decisions as they move forward in life, which in turn will impact their ability to function as productive leaders in the workplace and financially literate citizens.   A student may not receive credit for both MGMT 205 and MGMT 395 with the topic "Achieving Personal Financial Security." Prereq: Sophomore standing or higher.
MGMT 206	Personal Financial Management with Digital Technology	1 Unit	In the digital era, financial technologies have worked its way into our digital wallets and portfolio. Mobile banking services, budgeting and investing apps are inextricably linked with how we conduct our personal finances. While financial literacy deals with underlying finance concepts such as time value of money, compounding, budgeting and investing, financial technologies dictate how we access tools to carry out day-to-day budgeting, investing and consuming. In the digital era, financial technologies, Fintech, serves as an enabler of financial literacy, FinLit. While technology is not a substitute for literacy, Fintech complements literacy. Technology has created a level playing field and has advanced the access to credit and investments.   This course will cover four areas: 1. Comparing banking services and costs 2. Digital banking: Using mobile apps and financial technologies for financial management and decision making 3. Personal finance and digital money 4. Risks in the digital era: Identity protection Offered as BAFI 206 and MGMT 206. Prereq: Sophomore standing or higher.
MGMT 315	International Management Institute	3 Units	The course provides undergraduate students with a unique overseas visitation, language orientation, and management subject experiences during periods such as Spring Break, or during interims immediately following the end of the semester.  Opportunities for diverse cultural and language experiences which result from the institute are added benefits of these programs.
MGMT 360	Special Topics and Issues in Management	1 - 9 Units	This course option is available to qualified students who are undertaking special projects in a management related field.
MGMT 361	Managing in a Global Economy	3 Units	Managers need new skills to enable them to manage effectively in what is increasingly a global economy. They need a deeper understanding of cultural differences and how these differences may influence communications with foreign employers, employees, customers, suppliers or partners. They need a better understanding of the economic and political mechanics of the world business system. They need to learn how to find out more about potential opportunities and threats that lie outside the United States. This course is designed to address these needs. Offered as MGMT 361 and MGMT 460.
MGMT 395	Advanced Seminar	1 Unit	This seminar, for Accounting and Management majors with junior class standing or above, provides an opportunity to consider topics of importance in the community of ideas and activities related to the professional and managerial world.  The development of writing and communication skills and in-depth discussion are expected attributes of seminar activity.  The topic and scope of the coverage will be defined by the course instructor as consistent with the seminar approach to learning of the University. Accounting and Management majors must complete three seminars, each with a different topic.  No academic credit will be earned for repeating seminars with the same topic. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: Declared Accounting or Management major and at least Junior standing.
MGMT 397	Undergraduate Research Project	3 - 6 Units	This course provides a supervisory structure for students completing and a capstone research project in the Weatherhead School of Management. Arrangements should be made by consultation with a faculty member selected and the Senior Capstone Committee of the School of Management. Open to all management and accounting majors and other qualified students with instructor approval. A written report, presentation to the faculty department most closely related to the student's topic, and an approved public presentation are required. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
MGMT 398	Action Learning	6 Units	This is an experiential course built around consulting projects in local organizations.  Each project is focused on solving a business problem or pursuing a business opportunity.  Each student will work in a  team to analyze the current situation and identify related problems/opportunities, conduct research, analyze findings, creatively envision alternatives, and recommend an appropriate course of action and next steps.  Throughout the semester students will receive instruction and coaching on the problem solving approach used in the course. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: (ACCT 102 or ACCT 200) and BAFI 355 and MKMR 201 and Senior standing with a declared Accounting or Management major.
MGMT 418	Curricular Practical Training	0 Unit	This course is intended for graduate business students who wish to gain curricular practical training in support of career goals.  The experience developed in an internship will complement academic experience gained in Weatherhead classes.
MGMT 456	Beyond Silicon Valley: Growing Entrepreneurship in Transitioning Economies	3 Units	The path for entrepreneurs to grow their companies outside of well-developed entrepreneurial ecosystems like Silicon Valley is challenging. Most markets around the world do not look like Silicon Valley, and they never will. But there are other models to support new businesses. In transitioning markets (where entrepreneurs do not have much access to private sector financing), government officials, donors, and business leaders are experimenting with creative approaches to support the growth of entrepreneurs. Cleveland is one such community. This seminar will explore some of these innovative approaches.
MGMT 458	International Institute	3 Units	The International Institute involves semester-long study of a particular region, followed by a class trip to an area within that region.  The preparatory coursework varies depending on the region selected for that particular semester; however, it typically consists of research about cultural, financial, political, and economic topics.  The trip consists of daily research meeting with organizations within the region being studied.  Upon return, a summary exercise is required to complete the coursework.  The class trip is a mandatory component of the course.
MGMT 460	Managing in a Global Economy	3 Units	Managers need new skills to enable them to manage effectively in what is increasingly a global economy. They need a deeper understanding of cultural differences and how these differences may influence communications with foreign employers, employees, customers, suppliers or partners. They need a better understanding of the economic and political mechanics of the world business system. They need to learn how to find out more about potential opportunities and threats that lie outside the United States. This course is designed to address these needs. Offered as MGMT 361 and MGMT 460.
MGMT 464	Business Ethics	3 Units	This course is built around two core learning tracks.  The first is extended analyses of case studies, which identifies ethical problems, diagnoses import, and develops strategic programs to address them.  The second learning track uses short pieces of fiction to explore issues of ethical character, leadership, and organizational responsibility.  Each student keeps an ethics journal over the course of the semester to reflect on ethical issues, both inside and outside the classroom.  In addition, small student groups are formed to write case studies focusing on a business ethics problem.
MGMT 465	Perspectives in European Management	3 Units	The European Institute provides an introduction to international business through a unique combination of class meetings and  an excursion to  Europe. While in Europe, students meet with local business people, consulate officials, and university professors to learn the prerequisites for doing business in the region. The trip features site visits to local companies.
MGMT 467	Commercialization and Intellectual Property Management	3 Units	This interdisciplinary course covers a variety of topics, including principles of intellectual property and intellectual property management, business strategies and modeling relevant to the creation of start-up companies and exploitation of IP rights as they relate to biomedical-related inventions.  The goal of this course is to address issues relating to the commercialization of biomedical-related inventions by exposing law students, MBA students, and Ph.D. candidates (in genetics and proteomics) to the challenges and opportunities encountered when attempting to develop biomedical intellectual property from the point of early discovery to the clinic and market.  Specifically, this course seeks to provide students with the ability to value a given technological advance or invention holistically, focusing on issues that extend beyond scientific efficacy and include patient and practitioner value propositions, legal and intellectual property protection, business modeling, potential market impacts, market competition, and ethical, social, and healthcare practitioner acceptance.  During this course, law students, MBA students, and Ph.D. candidates in genomics and proteomics will work in teams of five (two laws students, two MBA students and one Ph.D. candidate), focusing on issues of commercialization and IP management of biomedical-related inventions.  The instructors will be drawn from the law school, business school, and technology-transfer office.  Please visit the following website for more information: fusioninnovate.com. Offered as EBME 467, ECSE 467, GENE 367, GENE 467, LAWS 5341, MGMT 467, and RGME 467.
MGMT 495	AMES Business Model	3 Units	AMES BUSINESS MODELS is an experiential course designed to explore the challenges that face entrepreneurs and established organizations as they develop new business models. Throughout the course we will address four general questions regarding business models: What are the key elements of any business model? How do those elements work in concert to create value? What challenges do innovators face as they explore new business models? What tools and techniques help innovators reduce their risk and enable growth? At the end of this course students should be able to: Describe the essential elements of a business model and how that model is meant to create value. Assess the potential of any business model and the key assumptions upon which it is built. Design and execute experiments to efficiently validate (or invalidate) those assumptions. Whether students plan to join an existing organization or start their own, these tools will provide a foundation for creating innovative, sustainable businesses. This course will focus Intrepreneurship (creating and testing new business models within an established organization).
MGMT 497	Action Learning Project	3 Units	This course allows teams of students to integrate functional, core knowledge and apply analysis and strategic management skills in a real-world setting. Students will be evaluated by the instructor and the project managers at the client organizations. Prereq: Part-time Cohort MBA Students and Master of Healthcare Management students only.
MGMT 501	Special Problems and Topics	1 - 18 Units	This course is offered, with permission, to students undertaking reading in a field of special interest.
MGMT 502	Independent Study	1 - 18 Units	This course is offered, with Dean's Office permission, to students undertaking reading in a field of special interest.
MGMT 560	Theoretical Perspectives in Management	3 Units	This seminar exposes students to management theories from a variety of disciplines. The goal of the course is to help students learn to synthesize and contrast theories to develop hypotheses of their own. Prereq: Ph.D. standing or consent of instructor.
MGMT 571	Measurement Theory and Method	3 Units	This doctoral seminar focuses on the theoretical and methodological issues involved in social science measurement. Specifically, the course will cover topics in basic principles of measurement including Classical Test Theory, Reliability, Validity, and Item Response Theory, as well as related tools for measurement analysis including Exploratory and Confirmatory Factor analysis. In addition, the course will expose students to analytical methods that model measurement error in simultaneous equations including models with mediation and moderation effects. This course involves extensive use of statistical packages including SPSS, LISREL, and EQS. Prereq: Ph.D. standing.
MGMT 573	Applied Multivariate Data Analysis	3 Units	The objectives of the seminar are to provide students with an understanding of the substantive and methodological issues involved in applied multivariate data analysis. The seminar aims to expose students to the assumptions, principles and applications of a selected set of multivariate techniques including Logistic Regression, MANOVA/Discriminant, Profile, Multilevel and Latent Growth Model analysis. This course involves extensive use of statistical packages including SPSS, LISREL, and EQS. Prereq: Ph.D. standing.
MGMT 602	Advanced Topics	1 - 18 Units	This is a course of flexible design to meet advanced theoretical and/or methodological needs of doctoral students. Approval is needed from the instructor, and it requires a letter grade.
MGMT 614	Business as an Evolving Complex System	3 Units	The goal of this course is to provide a foundation for understanding how business systems evolve, why the business systems in the major advanced countries have evolved differently over the last 100 years or so, and what the underlying driving forces are. The focus is on transformation rather than economic growth. The course examines the evolution of business systems as a result of technological and organizational change. It deals with the role of history, culture and finance in generating business organizations in various countries. The course also studies the emergence of regional innovation systems and industry clusters, as well as how digitization and globalization are changing the industrial logic. Prereq: Must be enrolled in PhD in Mgt: Designing Sustainable Systems.
MGMT 616	Global Economic Systems and Issues	3 Units	This course provides a framework and analytical tools for understanding globalization and international economic relations in the context of the global political system.  It analyzes the economic and political forces that are shaping global cooperation on economic matters, the role and impact of international economic institutions such as the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Trade Organization, and evolving forms of regional governance, such as the European Union.  It covers national and international policies and development and the causes and cures of international financial crises.  The course revolves around concepts of efficiency, equality, power and institutions in the making of public policy towards globalization of communications and transportation. Prereq: Must be enrolled in Ph.D in Management: Designing Systems track.
MGMT 640	Social Ethics: Contemporary Issues	3 Units	The course draws upon intellectual ancestors and current thinkers in moral philosophy and ethics to assist each student in identifying, analyzing, and discussing social and ethical questions pertaining to the definition and purpose of contemporary life, the need for moral coherence, and the meaning of life in a global society.  The unifying theme of the course is Tolstoy's question, "How then shall we live?"  The course does not seek to provide answers to the great questions of life.  Rather, it tries to expand each student's capacity to grapple with such questions. Prereq: Must be enrolled in Ph.D in Management: Designing Sustainable Systems track.
MGMT 643	Measuring Bus Behav & Struc	3 Units	This course aims to develop the basic foundations and skills for designing and executing generalizable studies that measure business behaviors and structures. It focuses on building competence in building of measurement systems, construct measurement, research design, data collection methodologies, and application of analytical software commonly involved in quantitative inquiry. Covered topics include framing research questions, reliability and validity of measurement, quasi-experimental research design, and fieldwork for data collection. Classes are designed to balance theory and practice through quantitative research design and will be linked to the participant's own research project. Prereq: Must be enrolled in Ph.D in Management: Designing Sustainable Systems track.
MGMT 645	Integration of Qualitative and Quantitative Inquiry	3 Units	Using the mixed method research toolkit developed in previous courses, this course focuses on critically analyzing selected pieces of published applied and policy research to develop a critical appreciation of issues and debates that have wide applicability and relevance. In particular, it offers students ways to integrate and triangulate using a mixed method approach, different forms of evidence, and related evidence. In addition, this course addresses common method choice and justification issues and related challenges of validity and theory formulation that typically arise during the students' execution of a series of individual research projects.  Application of critical analysis and appreciation approach in justifying mixed methods designs to the student's own research work is encouraged and supported by sharing and discussing common research and methodology themes and problems. Prereq: Must be enrolled in Ph.D in Management: Designing Sustainable Systems track.
MGMT 646	Advanced Analytical Methods for Generalizing Research	3 Units	This course addresses advanced topics in regression and structural equation modeling such as latent growth curve models, partial least squares, logit models, tests for various types of invariance, multiple-group analysis, multilevel analysis, and analyzing qualitative/categorical data.  These analytical methods are intended to enhance the student's toolkit as to facilitate a strong bridge to the academic literature and the application to specific data based problems that arise in applied managerial research. Prereq: Must be enrolled in Ph.D in Management: Designing Sustainable Systems track.
MGMT 648	Causal Analysis of Business Problems I	3 Units	Causal Analysis of Business Problems I introduces fundamental concepts in theory-based model building and validation.  In this course students will develop, explore, refine a range of models appropriate for addressing their problem of practice including classification models, process models, variance models, and articulating nomological networks.  In particular, the course will focus on effective conceptualizations of causation, control, mediation, and moderation.  Further, foundational statistical techniques such as tests of assumptions of the data, exploratory factor analysis, and regression and path analysis will be introduced to analyze concepts of causation, control, mediation and moderation. Prereq: Only for students in PhD in Management: Designing Sustainable Systems, or by permission of the Program Director.
MGMT 649	Causal Analysis of Business Problems II	3 Units	Building upon the first course in Causal Analysis of Business Problems, this course will guide students through the theoretically-grounded variance models that are required for testing through structural equation modeling (SEM) in the quantitative portion of their research. Fundamental concepts in model testing will be reinforced using path analysis, and will include a deeper exploration of moderation by addressing topics such as moderated mediation and interaction effects. Beyond the analysis the course will emphasize precise and accurate formulation of theoretical models and associated reasoning, as well as careful interpretation of findings. The class will also delve into testing of data assumptions and prepare students for the model testing portion of their capstone assignments. Prereq: Must be enrolled in Ph.D in Management: Designing Sustainable Systems track.
MGMT 664	Knowledge Dissemination to Influence Managerial Practice	3 Units	The aim of this course is twofold.  First, it supports students organizing and writing their DM thesis overview or their PhD thesis proposal.  Also discussed are ways to organize and communicate in scientific genres, their aims and their generic properties.  Secondly, students become acquainted with scientific communication and publishing.  Effective reviewing, criteria for judging articles and theses, management of review processes, and how to communicate and respond to reviews are topics discussed.  The course also addresses publication strategies and ways of managing and communicating scientific and managerial knowledge to different stakeholders. Prereq: Must be enrolled in Ph.D in Management: Designing Sustainable Systems track.
MGMT 677	Designing Sustainable Systems	3 Units	Students in teams will recognize and work in practice on a managerial problem that involves dimensions of sustainability and design.  They will develop a set of solutions to the problem by generating alternative models and intervention strategies to address the problem.  The project results in a short presentation and written communication of the solution in a form of a poster or prototype.  The course will also include presentations of intervention and action research approaches and issues of inquiry validation and theory development. Prereq: Only for students in PhD in Management: Designing Sustainable Systems.
MGMT 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Must be enrolled in Ph.D. in Management: Designing Sustainable Systems and have predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
PLCY 399	Business Policy	3 Units	This course uses case analysis to develop perspective and judgment on business problems through the integration of functional areas. Formulation, development, and implementation of organization goals and policies, the development of strategy in relation to the competitive environment, and applications of quantitative and behavioral decision-making techniques are examined. Prereq: Senior standing.
PLCY 501	Special Problems and Topics	1 - 18 Units	This course is offered, with permission, to students undertaking reading in a field of special interest.
MKMR 201	Marketing Management	3 Units	This is an introductory marketing course designed to provide students with the concepts and theories necessary for understanding the fundamental principles of marketing and its role in any organization.  Students will learn concepts such as marketing orientation, marketing-mix, relationship marketing and service logic, as well as behavioral theories of customer response and strategic frameworks of customer brand management.  Students develop capabilities for understanding marketing issues in real world situations and to create and implement basic marketing plans. Prereq: At least Sophomore standing.
MKMR 304	Brand Management	3 Units	Successful innovation and management of brands and products creates customer, firm, and societal value.  This course is designed to help students understand the principles of product and brand development and management such as understanding evolving customer needs; creating and delivering the right products, services, and experiences; and managing the process to enhance brand equity and customer satisfaction.  Through text, cases, and simulation this engaging class will cover the branding process from new brand and product development; brand communication and promotion, and brand equity measurement.  The course will also discuss specific topics such as global brands, brand extensions, brand revitalization, and social responsibility. Prereq: MKMR 201.
MKMR 308	Measuring Marketing Performance	3 Units	Evaluation and control are important strategic marketing processes and without effective and consistent measurement, these processes cannot be performed adequately.  In recent years, marketing budgets have been challenged by top managers as the value of these expenditures to an organization's financial well being is not often clear.  Marketing activities such as advertising, sales promotions, sales force allocation, new product development, and pricing all involve upfront investments and making these investments now require increasing scrutiny.  This course will be about knowing and understanding what to measure, how to measure, and how to report it so the link between marketing tactics and financial outcomes is clearer.  The course will include lecture by the instructor, readings, cases, computer based data exercises, and guest lectures.  There will also be a team project requirement. Prereq: (ACCT 100 or ACCT 101) and ECON 102 and MKMR 201.
MKMR 310	Marketing Analytics	3 Units	To appreciate, design, and implement data-based marketing studies for extracting valid and useful insights for managerial action that yield attractive ROI, five essential processes are emphasized: (a) making observations about customers, competitors, and markets, (b) recognizing, formulating, and refining meaningful problems as opportunities for managerial action, (c) developing and specifying testable models of marketing phenomenon, (d) designing and implementing research designs for valid data, and (e) rigorous analysis for uncovering and testing patterns and mechanisms from marketing data. Prereq: MKMR 201 and OPRE 207.
MKMR 311	Customer Relationship Management	3 Units	Customer Relationship Management (CRM) is the strategic process of building and maintaining profitable, sustainable customer relationships through co-creation of value with customers in both business-to-business (B2B) and business-to-consumer (B2C) markets.  This course starts with understanding the relationship between an organization's strategic goals and the structure and dynamics of organization-customer relationships.  Topics include assessing CRM system design, implementation and management; the fundamentals of customer profitability analysis; customer portfolio management; B2B relationship management; sales force management and automation; and designing services programs to optimize customer experiences; and expanding customer relationships through services.  Additionally, students will explore how one-to-one marketing and social networks enhance customer relationships.  Learning will be accomplished through lecture and discussion, critical discussion of case studies and contemporary marketing issues, and interaction with experienced CRM marketing professionals. Prereq: MKMR 201.
MKMR 312	Selling and Sales Management	3 Units	Selling and sales management are keys to implementing an organization's marketing program and customer relationships. This course emphasizes developing an understanding of basic marketing concepts, selling principles, interrelationships among sales force management and other business functions, appropriate strategy for managing a sales force and measurement of sales force productivity. We will use theories of work motivation and explore how individual difference variables influence the choices of sales managers. This course uses a synthesis of sales research and leading practices to focuses on both a strategic and a tactical perspective. Strategic issues include: entrepreneurial strategy, the sales force's role in company strategy, customer relationship and strategic account management, sales force size and organization and career paths to sales management. Tactical issues include: effective approaches to selling, finding and retaining top sales talent, motivating and compensating the field force, evaluating performance, and aligning sales territories. Prereq: MKMR 201.
MKMR 348	Strategic Internet Marketing	3 Units	This course aims to prepare business students to think strategically and make effective marketing decisions in networked business environments.  Given the increasing strategic significance of the internet across a broad spectrum of industries, it is imperative that business students develop a deep understanding of the emerging digital marketplace. The course will focus on the following topics:  The emerging digital world; individuals and firms online; network technologies; business models on the internet; online branding; customer relationship management and loyalty in electronic markets; internet's impact on innovation and product management; online retailing; business-to-business e-commerce; multi-channel management; sustainable competitive advantage in the digital marketplace; legal, ethical, and public policy issues related to digital technologies; organizing for online marketing. Prereq: MKMR 201.
MKMR 360	Independent Study	1 - 3 Units	This course is offered, with permission, to students undertaking reading and research in an area of their special interest.
MKMR 405	Business Marketing	3 Units	This course focuses on concepts and practices of business-to-business marketing of products and services. It also examines how rapid technological change impacts industrial markets. Topics covered include: buyer-seller relationship building, competitive bidding, developing markets for new materials and value-based pricing strategies. Marketing to the government, marketing of intellectual property and marketing-R&D-manufacturing interface issues will also be explored. Prereq: MBAP 407 or MBAC 506 or HSMC 407.
MKMR 408	Marketing Metrics	3 Units	Evaluation and control are important strategic marketing processes and without effective and consistent measurement, these processes cannot be performed adequately.  In recent years, marketing budgets have been challenged by top managers as the value of these expenditures to an organization's financial well being is not often clear.  Marketing activities such as advertising, sales promotions, sales force allocation, new product development and pricing all involve up-front investments and making these investments now require increasing scrutiny.  This course will be about knowing and understanding what to measure, how to measure and how to report it so the link between marketing tactics and financial outcomes is clearer.  The course will include lecture by the instructor, readings (no textbook), cases, computer based data exercises and guest lectures.  There will also be a team project requirement. Prereq: MBAC 506, MBAP 407 or HSMC 407.
MKMR 410	Marketing Insight Management	3 Units	To appreciate, design, and implement data-based marketing studies for extracting valid and useful insights for managerial action that yield attractive ROI.  Five essential processes are emphasized: (a) making observations about customers, competitors, and markets, (b) recognizing, formulating, and refining meaningful problems as opportunities for managerial action, (c) developing and specifying testable models of marketing phenomenon, (d) designing and implementing research designs for valid data, and (e) rigorous analysis for uncovering and testing patterns and mechanisms from marketing data. Prereq: MBAC 506 or MBAC 511 or MBAP 403 or MBAP 407.
MKMR 411	Customer Relationship Management	3 Units	Customer Relationship Management (CRM) is the strategic process of building and maintaining profitable customer relationships through co-creation of value with customers.  This course starts with understanding the relationship between an organization's strategic goals and customer relationships, including assessing CRM systems, management and implementation, in both B2B and B2C markets.  Students will learn the fundamentals of customer profitability analysis, customer portfolio management, B2B relationship/sales force management and automation, designing services to optimize customer experiences, as well as expanding customer relationships through services.  Additionally, students will explore how one-to-one marketing and social networks enhance customer relationships.  Learning will be accomplished through critical discussion of case studies and contemporary marketing issues, and hands-on group project and presentation, and interaction with experienced CRM marketing professionals. Prereq: MBAP 407 or MBAC 506 or HSMC 407.
MKMR 412	E-Marketing	3 Units	Using a combination of lectures, cases, and hands-on projects, the course examines how the Internet influences all the key aspects of marketing, including marketing strategy, pricing, advertising, segmentation, marketing research, retailing, distribution channels, and international marketing.  Additionally, the course will cover more Internet specific topics such as privacy, wireless web, sales force automation, and emarketplace models.  The course incorporates both business-to-business and business-to-consumer outlooks. Prereq: MBAC 506 or MBAP 407.
MKMR 421	Marketing Value Creation	3 Units	Marketing value creation is the process of creating and managing successful brands through continuous innovation.  Successful brand innovation and management requires understanding evolving customer needs; creating and delivering the right products, services, and experiences; and managing the process to enhance brand equity and customer satisfaction.  Through text, readings, cases, high-profile guest lectures and team projects, this engaging class will cover the innovation and branding process from discovery of unmet needs, brand and product development,  to brand promotion and advertising and brand equity measurement.  A sustainability thread will weave through the course, covering topics such as brand's ecological footprint, product safety, eco-friendly branding, the ethics of advertising, the impact of pricing on consumers and corporate social responsibility.  The result of proper sensitivity to customer needs, social concerns and the environment is integral to the process of value creation for customers, companies and society. Prereq: MBAC 506 or MBAP 407.
MKMR 501	Special Problems and Topics	1 - 18 Units	This course is offered, with permission, to students undertaking reading or a project in a field of special interest.
MKMR 601	Special Problems and Topics	1 - 18 Units	This course is offered, with permission, to Ph.D. candidates undertaking reading or a project in a field of special interest.
NUMN 400	Guided Study	1 - 12 Units	Independent guided study for students with special interests and/or curricular needs. May include didactic, lab, and/or clinical experiences. Separate guided study plan form required. Faculty consent required to register.
NUMN 401	Introduction to the Discipline and Practice of Nursing	6.5 Units	This course is an introduction to the discipline and practice of nursing. Factors influencing health and illness will be explored. Selected nursing strategies and interventions designed to support the maximum health potential of the adult client will be incorporated into lab sessions and practiced in acute care and other settings as arranged. Historical, societal, and legal influences on nursing and the role and functions of the professional nurse will be examined. Coreq: NUMN 402 and NUMN 410.
NUMN 402	Pharmacology for the Advanced Generalist Nurse	3 Units	This course is an introduction to the principles of pharmacology and pharmacotherapeutics, including characteristics of the major drug classifications with emphasis on drug action and adverse effects. Students will apply knowledge of pharmacology to implications for safe, patient-centered nursing care. Coreq: NUMN 401 and NUMN 410.
NUMN 403	Introduction to Health Informatics and Digital Health	1 Unit	This course will introduce students to health informatics, digital health, and nursing management of information within the health care setting.  Students will examine core models, theories of nursing informatics and the importance of nursing involvement in the design, implementation and evaluation of information systems.  Students will analyze and apply informational technology that supports clinical practice, education, research and administration. Coreq: NUMN 401.
NUMN 406	Nursing Care of Older Adults in Health and Illness	2 Units	This course will explore the concept of aging in health and illness with an emphasis on the older adult as an individual with the capacity to grow and develop. Theories of aging, geriatric syndromes, and the multiple interacting determinants influencing the health of older adults will be examined.  Students will design and implement theory and evidence-based, safe, patient-centered nursing interventions tailored to the unique needs of older adults and their caregivers. Prereq or Coreq: NUMN 401 and NUMN 410.
NUMN 407	Acute Care Nursing of the Adult	8.5 Units	This course will focus on  application of the nursing process to the care of adults experiencing acute and chronic alterations in health.  Examination of relevant assessment findings, pathophysiology, and pharmacological interventions will be included.  Emphasis will be placed on clinical practice, including nursing strategies designed to provide comprehensive, patient-centered care for the acutely ill adult. Prereq: NUMN 401 and NUMN 410.
NUMN 409	Policy for Emerging Nurse Leaders	1.5 Unit	This course will expand on foundational advocacy knowledge and examine goal-directed decision-making to promote health for patients, individual nurses, the profession, and society. As emerging nurse leaders, the learner will identify global policy solutions to promote patient and provider safety and quality in the workplace and in healthcare systems. The impact of political, environmental, cultural and social determinants of health and health disparities in shaping policy will be analyzed. Prereq: NUMN 414.
NUMN 410	Health Assessment for the Advanced Generalist Nurse	2.5 Units	This course uses a comprehensive, system-by-system, patient-centered approach to provide students with assessment and interviewing skills required for practice as an advanced generalist nurse.  Students will apply critical thinking to make decisions regarding utilization of assessment findings including communication of the findings to the patient. Coreq: NUMN 401.
NUMN 411	Nursing Care of Populations in Communities	3 Units	This course will focus on instructional and clinical learning experiences with populations in the community, including vulnerable populations. Students will examine the influence of communities on the health of populations using an ecological perspective. Culturally-sensitive, asset-based strategies and analytical skills will be used to assess, describe, and implement nursing interventions to populations in the community. Coreq: NUMN 401.
NUMN 412A	Collaborative Practice I	2 Units	This course will introduce students to interprofessional education and collaboration. Students will develop knowledge, skills, and attitudes related to the four core competencies of interprofessional collaboration: 1) values for interprofessional practice, 2) understanding the roles and responsibilities of other professionals, 3) interprofessional communication, and 4) interprofessional teamwork. Cultural humility, civic responsibility, and service to others will be emphasized. Students will begin to apply these skills by participating within an interprofessional team on a community-based service learning project.
NUMN 412B	Collaborative Practice II	1.5 Unit	This course will build on previous learning related to interprofessional education and collaboration. Students will apply teamwork skills, culminating in the completion of a community-based service learning project designed to improve health and well-being for individuals, families, communities, and populations. Prereq: NUMN 412A.
NUMN 413	Issues and Ethics in Health Care	2 Units	This course introduces students to the principles underlying ethical issues and methods of rational decision making.  Fundamental theories will be reviewed and applied through case analyses to address ethical dilemmas common to modern health care.
NUMN 414	Leadership and Management in Professional Nursing Practice	2.5 Units	This course will focus on leadership and management concepts and their application in the role of professional nursing. Students will examine management processes, leadership theory, and competencies related to clinical practice. An emphasis will be placed on professionalism, professional identity, equity, inclusion, and emotional intelligence. Internal and external factors impacting nursing management will be analyzed. Coreq: NUMN 407.
NUMN 415	Parents and Neonates in Health and Illness	4.25 Units	This course will focus on the health needs of women and families in the preconception, antepartum, intrapartum, and postpartum period.  Health topics related to the reproductive system will be explored.  The influence of intervening variables on bio-psycho-social development of the childbearing family will be analyzed.  In the clinical experience, students will implement and evaluate nursing strategies designed to enhance health in parents and neonates in health and illness. Prereq: NUMN 407.
NUMN 416	Family-Centered Nursing Care of Children and Adolescents	4.25 Units	This course will prepare nursing students to identify the healthcare needs of children from infancy through late adolescence. Principles of childhood development and family-centered atraumatic care will be incorporated into plans for optimizing physical, mental, and psychosocial wellbeing in health and illness. The influence of family variables and social determinants of health will be analyzed. Clinical and lab experiences will provide learners the opportunity to demonstrate safe clinical reasoning and knowledge integration. Prereq: NUMN 407. Coreq: NUMN 414.
NUMN 417	Psychiatric Mental Health Nursing	4 Units	This course is designed to address psychiatric nursing concepts related to mental illness and addiction.  The focus is on achieving optimal health for clients with acute and chronic psychiatric disorders using interpersonal techniques and applying the nursing process. Nursing strategies that are appropriate for assessment and intervention with individuals, families, and groups to facilitate optimal mental health and recovery will be discussed and evaluated. Prereq: NUMN 407
NUMN 418	Intro to Critical Care Nursing	6 Units	The focus of this course is on integrating the knowledge and skills required to safely and effectively provide quality patient care in the critical care setting.  Emphasis is placed on implementation of the nursing process and standards of practice required to care for critically ill patients and their families.  The didactic component includes topics on current practice and trends in critical care nursing.  The clinical component provides students with opportunities to implement the roles and functions of the advanced generalist nurse. Prereq or Coreq: NURS 502.
NUMN 419	Advanced Generalist Nurse Leadership	2.5 Units	This course is part of the concentration in leadership for safe quality healthcare. It provides students with clinical practice opportunities to synthesize knowledge, skills, and attitudes, and implement the roles of the advanced generalist nurse as leader for evidence-based quality healthcare for populations across the continuum of care. Coreq: NURS 451, NURS 502, and NUMN 409.
NUMN 420	Clinical Immersion	1 Unit	This clinical immersion will build on previous MN clinical and didactic coursework and provide opportunities to integrate and apply knowledge and skills in a selected patient population.  The course will enhance preparation for entry into professional nursing practice. Coreq: NUMN 418.
EMSE 102	Materials for Current and Future Technologies	1 Unit	Open to all students discussing the importance of materials on current and future technologies. The course will be a series of seminars by the faculty at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering covering important topics such as materials processing, use of materials in a variety of technologically important areas; e.g., construction, energy related technologies, biomedical applications and space applications.
EMSE 110	Transitioning Ideas to Reality I - Materials in Service of Industry and Society	1 Unit	In order for ideas to impact the lives of individuals and society they must be moved from "blue sky" to that which is manufacturable.  Therein lies true creativity - design under constraint.  Greater Cleveland is fortunate to have a diverse set of industries that serve medical, aerospace, electric, and advanced-materials technologies.  This course involves trips to an array of work sites of leading companies to witness first-hand the processes and products, and to interact directly with practitioners.  Occasional in-class speakers with demonstrations will be used when it is not logistically reasonable to visit off-site.
EMSE 120	Transitioning Ideas to Reality II - Manufacturing Laboratory	2 Units	This course complements EMSE 110.  In that class students witness a diverse array of processing on-site in industry.  In this class students work in teams and as individuals within processing laboratories working with an array of "real materials" to explore the potential of casting, machining, and deformation processes to produce real parts and/or components.  An introduction to CAD as a means of communication is provided.  The bulk of the term is spent in labs doing hands-on work.  Planned work is carried out to demonstrate techniques and potential.  Students have the opportunity to work independently or in teams to produce articles as varied as jewelry, electronics, transportation vehicles, or novel components or devices of the students' choosing.
EMSE 125	First Year Research in Materials Science and Engineering	1 Unit	First year students conduct independent research in the area of material science and engineering, working closely with graduate student(s) and/or postdoctoral fellow(s), and supervised by an EMSE faculty member.  An average of 5-6 hr/wk in the laboratory, periodic updates, and an end of semester report is required. Prereq: Limited to first year undergraduate students..
EMSE 220	Materials Laboratory I	2 Units	Experiments designed to introduce processing, microstructure and property relationships of metal alloys and ceramics.  Solidification of a binary alloy and metallography by optical and scanning electron microscopy.  Synthesis of ceramics powders, thermal analysis using thermogravimetric analysis and differential thermal analysis, powder consolidation.  Kinetics of high-temperature sintering, grain growth, and metal oxidation.  Statistical analysis of experimental results.  Recommended preparation or recommended co-requisite: EMSE 276.
EMSE 228	Mathematical and Computational Methods for Materials Science and Engineering	3 Units	The course combines fundamental topics of material science and engineering with underlying mathematical methods and coding for computation.  Focusing on the mathematics of vectors and using Mathematica as computational framework, the course teaches how to solve problems drawn from crystallography, diffraction, imaging of materials, and image processing.  Students will develop a fundamental understanding of the basis for solving these problems including understanding the constituent equations, solution methods, and analysis and presentation of results. Prereq:  (ENGR 131 or CSDS 132 or ECSE 132) and ENGR 145.
EMSE 276	Materials Properties and Design	3 Units	Relation of crystal structure, microstructure, and chemical composition to the properties of materials. The role materials processing has in controlling structure so as to obtain desired properties, using examples from metals, semiconductors, ceramics, and composites. Design content includes exercises in materials selection, and in design of materials to meet specified performance requirements. Prereq: MATH 121 and ENGR 145.  Prereq or Coreq: PHYS 122 or PHYS 124.
EMSE 308	Welding Metallurgy	3 Units	Introduction to arc welding and metallurgy of welding. The course provides a broad overview of different industrial applications requiring welding, the variables controlling critical property requirements of the weld and a survey of the different types of arc welding processes. The course details the fundamental concepts that govern the different aspects of arc welding including the welding arc, weld pool solidification, precipitate formation and solid state phase transformations.   Offered as EMSE 308 and EMSE 408. Coreq: EMSE 327.
EMSE 319	Processing and Manufacturing of Materials	3 Units	Introduction to processing technologies by which materials are manufactured into engineering components.  Discussion of how processing methods are dependent on desired composition, structure, microstructure, and defects, and how processing affects material performance.  Emphasis will be placed on processes and treatments to achieve or improve chemical, mechanical, physical performance and/or aesthetics, including: casting, welding, forging, cold-forming, powder processing of metals and ceramics, and polymer and composite processing.  Coverage of statistics and computational tools relevant to materials manufacturing. Prereq: EMSE 276.
EMSE 320	Materials Laboratory II	1 Unit	Measurement of thermophysical properties of materials emphasizing thermal and electrical properties of materials.  Laboratory teams are selected for all experiments.  Statistical analysis of experimental results also emphasized.  Recommended preparation or corequisite: EMSE 276.
EMSE 325	Undergraduate Research in Materials Science and Engineering	1 - 3 Units	Undergraduate laboratory research in materials science and engineering.  Students will undertake an independent research project alongside graduate student(s) and/or postdoctoral fellow(s), and will be supervised by an EMSE faculty member.  Written and oral reports will be given on a regular basis, and an end of semester report is required.  The course can be repeated up to four (4) times for a total of six (6) credit hours. Prereq: Sophomore or Junior standing and consent of instructor.
EMSE 327	Thermodynamic Stability and Rate Processes	3 Units	An introduction to thermodynamics of materials as applied to metals, ceramics, polymers and optical/radiant heat transfer for photovoltaics.  The laws of thermodynamics are introduced and the general approaches used in the thermodynamic method are presented.  Systems studied span phase stability and oxidation in metals and oxides; nitride ceramics and semiconductors; polymerization, crystallization and block copolymer domain formation; and the thermodynamics of systems such as for solar power collection and conversion.  Recommended preparation: EMSE 228 and ENGR 225 or equivalent. Prereq: EMSE 276 or EMSE 201.
EMSE 328	Mesoscale Structural Control of Functional Materials	3 Units	The course focuses on mesoscale structure of materials and their interrelated effects on properties, mostly in electrical in nature. The mesoscale science covers the structures varying from electronic- to micro-structure. In each scale, fundamental science will be complimented by examples of applications and how the structure is exploited both to modify and enable function. The student will develop an understanding of how the structure across multiple scales are interrelated and how to tailor them for desired outcomes. Offered as:  EMSE 328 and EMSE 428. Prereq: (MATH 223 or MATH 227) and (EMSE 276 or EMSE 201).
EMSE 330	Materials Laboratory III	2 Units	Experiments designed to characterize and evaluate different microstructures produced by variations in processing. Hardenability of steels, TTT and CT diagrams, precipitation hardening of alloys and fracture of brittle materials. Statistical analysis of experimental results. Recommended preparation: EMSE 276. Recommended preparation or co-requisites: EMSE 327.
EMSE 335	Strategic Metals and Materials for the 21st Century	3 Units	This course seeks to create an understanding of the role of mineral-based materials in the modern economy focusing on how such knowledge can and should be used in making strategic choices in an engineering context.  The history of the role of materials in emerging technologies from a historical perspective will be briefly explored.  The current literature will be used to demonstrate the connectedness of materials availability and the development and sustainability of engineering advances with examples of applications exploiting structural, electronic, optical, magnetic, and energy conversion properties.  Processing will be comprehensively reviewed from source through refinement through processing including property development through application of an illustrative set of engineering materials representing commodities, less common metals, and minor metals.  The concept of strategic recycling, including design for recycling and waste stream management will be considered.  Offered as EMSE 335 and EMSE 435. Prereq: Senior standing or graduate student.
EMSE 343	Processing of Electronic Materials	3 Units	The class will focus on the processing of materials for electronic applications. Necessary background into the fundamentals and applications will be given at the beginning to provide the basis for choices made during processing. MOSFET will be used as the target application. However, the processing steps covered are related to many other semiconductor based applications. The class will include both planar and bulk processing. Offered as:  EMSE 343 and EMSE 443. Prereq: (PHYS 122 or PHYS 124) and EMSE 276.
EMSE 345	Engineered Materials for Biomedical Applications	3 Units	A survey of synthetic biomedical materials from the perspective of materials science and engineering, focusing on how processing/synthesis, structure, and properties determine materials performance under the engineering demands imposed by physiological environments. Comparisons and contrasts between engineered metals, ceramics, and polymers, versus the biological materials they are called on to replace; consequences for materials and device design. Biomedical materials in applications such as orthopedic implants, dental restorations, wound healing, ophthalmic materials, and biomedical microelectromechanical systems (bioMEMS). Additive manufacturing of biomedical materials. Prereq: ENGR 200 and ENGR 145.
EMSE 349	Role of Materials in Energy and Sustainability	3 Units	This course has two parts: engineered materials as consumers of resources (raw materials, energy); and as key contributors to energy efficiency and sustainable energy technologies. Topics covered include: Energy usage in the U.S. and the world. Availability of raw materials, including strategic materials; factors affecting global reserves and annual world production. Resource demand of materials production, fabrication, and recycling. Design strategies, and how the inclusion of environmental impacts in design criteria can affect design outcomes and material selection. Roles of engineered materials in energy technologies: photovoltaics, solar thermal, fuel cells, wind, batteries, capacitors. Materials in energy-efficient lighting. Energy return on energy invested. Semester projects will allow students to explore related topics (e.g. geothermal; biomass; energy-efficient manufacturing and transportation). Offered as EMSE 349 and EMSE 449. Prereq: (ENGR 225 or EMAE 251 or EMAC 351) and ENGR 145 and (PHYS 122 or PHYS 124) or Requisites Not Met permission.
EMSE 365	Surface Engineering of Materials	3 Units	Introduction to surface engineering of materials, understood as a treatment that allows the surface to perform functions different from those performed by the bulk. This may include engineering the mechanical, chemical, electrical, magnetic, or optical properties of the surface and near-surface regions for specific applications. For a variety of technologically important classes of materials, the course reviews general concepts of surface engineering, the underlying physical and materials science principles, technical implementations, and typical applications. Recommended for graduate students and advanced undergraduate students. Offered as EMSE 365 and EMSE 465. Prereq: (EMSE 276 and ENGR 225) or Requisites Not Met permission.
EMSE 368	Scientific Writing in Materials Science and Engineering	3 Units	For writing a thesis (or a publication) in the field of materials science and engineering, students need a diverse set of skills in addition to mastering the scientific content. Generally, scientific writing requires proficiency in document organization, professional presentation of numerical and graphical data, literature retrieval and management, text processing, version control, graphical illustration, mathematical typesetting, the English language, elements of style, etc. Scientific writing in materials science and engineering, specifically, requires additional knowledge about e.g. conventions of numerical precision, error limits, mathematical typesetting, proper use of units, proper digital processing of micrographs, etc. Having to acquire these essential skills at the beginning of thesis (or publication) writing may compromise the outcome by distracting from the most important task of composing the best possible scientific content. This course properly prepares students for scientific writing with a comprehensive spectrum of knowledge, skills, and tools enabling them to fully focus on the scientific content of their thesis or publication when the time has come to start writing. Similar to artistic drawing, where the ability to "see" is as (or more!) important as skills of the hand, the ability of proper scientific writing is intimately linked to the ability of critically reviewing scientific texts. Therefore, students will practice both authoring and critical reviewing of material science texts. To sharpen students' skills of reviewing, examples of good and less good scientific writing will be taken from published literature of materials science and engineering and analyzed in the context of knowledge acquired in the course. At the end of the course, students will have set up skills and a highly functional work environment to start writing their role thesis or article with full focus on the scientific content. While the course mainly targets students of materials science and engineering, students of other disciplines of science and engineering may also benefit from the course material. Offered as EMSE 368 and EMSE 468.
EMSE 372	Structural Materials by Design	4 Units	Materials selection and design of mechanical and structural elements with respect to static failure, elastic stability, residual stresses, stress concentrations, impact, fatigue, creep, and environmental conditions. Mechanical behavior of engineering materials (metals, polymers, ceramics, composites). Influence of ultrastructural and microstructural aspects of materials on mechanical properties. Mechanical test methods covered. Models of deformation behavior of isotropic and anisotropic materials. Methods to analyze static and fatigue fracture properties. Rational approaches to materials selection for new and existing designs of structures. Failure analysis methods and examples, and the professional ethical responsibility of the engineer. Four mandatory laboratories, with reports. Offered as EMAE 372 and EMSE 372. Prereq: ENGR 200.
EMSE 379	Design for Lifetime Performance	3 Units	The roles of processing and properties of a material on its performance, cost, maintenance, degradation and end-of-life treatment.  Corrosion and oxidation, hydrogen and transformation-induced degradation mechanisms.  Defects from prior processing.  New defects generated during use/operation, e.g. generated from radiation, stress, heat etc.  Accumulation and growth of defects during use/operation; crack nucleation, propagation, failure.  Impact, abrasion, wear, corrosion/oxidation/reduction, stress-corrosion, fatigue, fretting, creep.  Evaluation of degradation: Non-destructive versus destructive methods, estimation of remaining lifetime.  Mitigation of degradation mechanisms.  Statistical tools for assessing a material's lifetime performance.  Capstone design project. Prereq: EMSE 372. Coreq: EMSE 319.
EMSE 396	Special Project or Thesis	1 - 18 Units	Special research projects or undergraduate thesis in selected material areas.
EMSE 398	Senior Project in Materials I	1 Unit	Independent Research project. Projects selected from those suggested by faculty; usually entail original research.  The EMSE 398 and 399 sequence form an approved SAGES capstone. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
EMSE 399	Senior Project in Materials II	2 Units	Independent Research project. Projects selected from those suggested by faculty; usually entail original research. Requirements include periodic reporting of progress, plus a final oral presentation and written report. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: EMSE 398.
EMSE 400T	Graduate Teaching I	0 Unit	To provide teaching experience for all Ph.D.-bound graduate students.  This will include preparing exams/quizzes, homework, leading recitation sessions, tutoring, providing laboratory assistance, and developing teaching aids that include both web-based and classroom materials. Graduate students will meet with supervising faculty member throughout the semester. Grading is pass/fail.  Students must receive three passing grades and up to two assignments may be taken concurrently. Recommended preparation: Ph.D. student in Materials Science and Engineering.
EMSE 408	Welding Metallurgy	3 Units	Introduction to arc welding and metallurgy of welding. The course provides a broad overview of different industrial applications requiring welding, the variables controlling critical property requirements of the weld and a survey of the different types of arc welding processes. The course details the fundamental concepts that govern the different aspects of arc welding including the welding arc, weld pool solidification, precipitate formation and solid state phase transformations.   Offered as EMSE 308 and EMSE 408.
EMSE 409	Deformation Processing	3 Units	Flow stress as a function of material and processing parameters; yielding criteria; stress states in elastic-plastic deformation; forming methods: forging, rolling, extrusion, drawing, stretch forming, composite forming.
EMSE 413	Fundamentals of Materials Engineering and Science	3 Units	Provides a background in materials for graduate students with undergraduate majors in other branches of engineering and science: reviews basic bonding relations, structure, and defects in crystals. Lattice dynamics; thermodynamic relations in multi-component systems; microstructural control in metals and ceramics; mechanical and chemical properties of materials as affected by structure; control of properties by techniques involving structure property relations; basic electrical, magnetic and optical properties.
EMSE 414	Electrical, Magnetic, Optical, and Thermal Properties of Materials	3 Units	Reviews quantum mechanics as applied to materials, energy bands, and density of states; Electrical properties of metals, semiconductors, insulators, and superconductors; Optical properties of materials, including:  metallic luster, color, and optoelectronics; Magnetic properties of materials, including:  Types of magnetic behavior, theory, and applications; Thermal properties of materials, including:  heat capacity, thermal expansion, and thermal conductivity. Prereq: Graduate Standing in Materials Science and Engineering or Requisites Not Met permission.
EMSE 417	Properties of Materials in Extreme Environments	3 Units	Fundamentals of degradation pathways of materials under extreme conditions; thermodynamic stability of microstructures, deformation mechanisms, and failure mechanisms. Extreme conditions that will typically be addressed include: elevated temperatures, high-strain rates (ballistic), environmental effects, nuclear radiation, and small scales. Examples will be drawn from recent events as appropriate.
EMSE 421	Fracture of Materials	3 Units	Micromechanisms of deformation and fracture of engineering materials. Brittle fracture and ductile fracture mechanisms in relation to microstructure. Strength, toughness, and test techniques. Review of predictive models. Recommended preparation: ENGR 200 and EMSE 427; or consent.
EMSE 422	Failure Analysis	3 Units	Methods and procedures for determining the basic causes of failures in structures and components. Recognition of fractures and excessive deformations in terms of their nature and origin. Development and full characterization of fractures. Review of essential mechanical behavior concepts and fracture mechanics concepts applied to failure analyses in inorganic, organic, and composite systems. Legal, ethical, and professional aspects of failures from service. Prereq: EMSE 372 or EMAE 372 or Requisites Not Met permission.
EMSE 427	Defects in Solids	3 Units	Defects in solids control many properties of interest to the materials scientist or engineer.  This course focuses on point, line, and interfacial defects in crystals and their interactions, including calculations of defect energies and interaction forces. Crystallographic defects presented include point defects (e.g., vacancies, interstitials, substitutional and interstitial impurities), line defects (e.g., dislocations), and planar defects (e.g., grain boundaries).  The consequence of point defects on diffusion as well as on optical and electronic properties is discussed.  Dislocation motion and dislocation dissociation are treated, and the influence of dislocation dynamics on yield phenomena, work hardening, and other mechanical properties are discussed.  The role of grain boundaries and inter-phase boundaries in determining the physical properties of the material are presented. Experimental techniques for characterizing defects are integrated throughout the course. Recommended preparation: MATH 223 (or equivalent) and EMSE 276 (or equivalent).
EMSE 428	Mesoscale Structural Control of Functional Materials	3 Units	The course focuses on mesoscale structure of materials and their interrelated effects on properties, mostly in electrical in nature. The mesoscale science covers the structures varying from electronic- to micro-structure. In each scale, fundamental science will be complimented by examples of applications and how the structure is exploited both to modify and enable function. The student will develop an understanding of how the structure across multiple scales are interrelated and how to tailor them for desired outcomes. Offered as:  EMSE 328 and EMSE 428.
EMSE 435	Strategic Metals and Materials for the 21st Century	3 Units	This course seeks to create an understanding of the role of mineral-based materials in the modern economy focusing on how such knowledge can and should be used in making strategic choices in an engineering context.  The history of the role of materials in emerging technologies from a historical perspective will be briefly explored.  The current literature will be used to demonstrate the connectedness of materials availability and the development and sustainability of engineering advances with examples of applications exploiting structural, electronic, optical, magnetic, and energy conversion properties.  Processing will be comprehensively reviewed from source through refinement through processing including property development through application of an illustrative set of engineering materials representing commodities, less common metals, and minor metals.  The concept of strategic recycling, including design for recycling and waste stream management will be considered.  Offered as EMSE 335 and EMSE 435. Prereq: Senior standing or graduate student.
EMSE 443	Processing of Electronic Materials	3 Units	The class will focus on the processing of materials for electronic applications. Necessary background into the fundamentals and applications will be given at the beginning to provide the basis for choices made during processing. MOSFET will be used as the target application. However, the processing steps covered are related to many other semiconductor based applications. The class will include both planar and bulk processing. Offered as:  EMSE 343 and EMSE 443. Prereq: (PHYS 122 or PHYS 124) and EMSE 276.
EMSE 449	Role of Materials in Energy and Sustainability	3 Units	This course has two parts: engineered materials as consumers of resources (raw materials, energy); and as key contributors to energy efficiency and sustainable energy technologies. Topics covered include: Energy usage in the U.S. and the world. Availability of raw materials, including strategic materials; factors affecting global reserves and annual world production. Resource demand of materials production, fabrication, and recycling. Design strategies, and how the inclusion of environmental impacts in design criteria can affect design outcomes and material selection. Roles of engineered materials in energy technologies: photovoltaics, solar thermal, fuel cells, wind, batteries, capacitors. Materials in energy-efficient lighting. Energy return on energy invested. Semester projects will allow students to explore related topics (e.g. geothermal; biomass; energy-efficient manufacturing and transportation). Offered as EMSE 349 and EMSE 449. Prereq: ENGR 225 and (ENGR 145 or EMSE 146) and (PHYS 122 or PHYS 124) or requisites not met permission.
EMSE 465	Surface Engineering of Materials	3 Units	Introduction to surface engineering of materials, understood as a treatment that allows the surface to perform functions different from those performed by the bulk. This may include engineering the mechanical, chemical, electrical, magnetic, or optical properties of the surface and near-surface regions for specific applications. For a variety of technologically important classes of materials, the course reviews general concepts of surface engineering, the underlying physical and materials science principles, technical implementations, and typical applications. Recommended for graduate students and advanced undergraduate students. Offered as EMSE 365 and EMSE 465.
EMSE 468	Scientific Writing in Materials Science and Engineering	3 Units	For writing a thesis (or a publication) in the field of materials science and engineering, students need a diverse set of skills in addition to mastering the scientific content. Generally, scientific writing requires proficiency in document organization, professional presentation of numerical and graphical data, literature retrieval and management, text processing, version control, graphical illustration, mathematical typesetting, the English language, elements of style, etc. Scientific writing in materials science and engineering, specifically, requires additional knowledge about e.g. conventions of numerical precision, error limits, mathematical typesetting, proper use of units, proper digital processing of micrographs, etc. Having to acquire these essential skills at the beginning of thesis (or publication) writing may compromise the outcome by distracting from the most important task of composing the best possible scientific content. This course properly prepares students for scientific writing with a comprehensive spectrum of knowledge, skills, and tools enabling them to fully focus on the scientific content of their thesis or publication when the time has come to start writing. Similar to artistic drawing, where the ability to "see" is as (or more!) important as skills of the hand, the ability of proper scientific writing is intimately linked to the ability of critically reviewing scientific texts. Therefore, students will practice both authoring and critical reviewing of material science texts. To sharpen students' skills of reviewing, examples of good and less good scientific writing will be taken from published literature of materials science and engineering and analyzed in the context of knowledge acquired in the course. At the end of the course, students will have set up skills and a highly functional work environment to start writing their role thesis or article with full focus on the scientific content. While the course mainly targets students of materials science and engineering, students of other disciplines of science and engineering may also benefit from the course material. Offered as EMSE 368 and EMSE 468.
EMSE 499	Materials Science and Engineering Colloquium	0 Unit	Invited speakers deliver lectures on topics of active research in materials science.  Speakers include researchers at universities, government laboratories, and industry.  Course is offered only for 0 credits. Attendance is required.
EMSE 500T	Graduate Teaching II	0 Unit	To provide teaching experience for all Ph.D.-bound graduate students.  This will include preparing exams/quizzes/homework, leading recitation sessions, tutoring, providing laboratory assistance, and developing teaching aids that include both web-based and classroom materials. Graduate students will meet with supervising faculty member throughout the semester.  Grading is pass/fail.  Students must receive three passing grades and up to two assignments may be taken concurrently. Recommended preparation: Ph.D. student in Materials Science and Engineering.
EMSE 503	Structure of Materials	3 Units	The structure of materials and physical properties are explored in terms of atomic bonding and the resulting crystallography. The course will cover basic crystal chemistry, basic crystallography (crystal symmetries, point groups, translation symmetries, space lattices, and crystal classes), basic characterization techniques and basic physical properties related to a materials structure.
EMSE 504	Thermodynamics of Solids	3 Units	Review of the first, second, and third laws of thermodynamics and their consequences. Stability criteria, simultaneous chemical reactions, binary and multi-component solutions, phase diagrams, surfaces, adsorption phenomena.
EMSE 505	Phase Transformations, Kinetics, and Microstructure	3 Units	Phase diagrams are used in materials science and engineering to understand the interrelationships of composition, microstructure, and processing conditions.  The microstructure and phases constitution of metallic and nonmetallic systems alike are determined by the thermodynamic driving forces and reaction pathways.  In this course, solution thermodynamics, the energetics of surfaces and interfaces, and both diffusional and diffusionless phase transformations are reviewed.  The development of the laws of diffusion and its application for both melts and solids are covered.  Phase equilibria and microstructure in multicomponent systems will also be discussed.
EMSE 509	Conventional Transmission Electron Microscopy	3 Units	Introduction to transmission electron microscopy-theoretical background and practical work. Lectures and laboratory experiments cover the technical construction and operation of transmission electron microscopes, specimen preparation, electron diffraction by crystals, electron diffraction techniques of TEM, conventional TEM imaging, and scanning TEM. Examples from various fields of materials research illustrate the application and significance of these techniques. Recommended preparation: Consent of instructor.
EMSE 515	Analytical Methods in Materials Science	3 Units	Microcharacterization techniques of materials science and engineering: SPM (scanning probe microscopy), SEM (scanning electron microscopy), FIB (focused ion beam) techniques, SIMS (secondary ion mass spectrometry), EPMA (electron probe microanalysis), XPS (X-ray photoelectron spectrometry), and AES (Auger electron spectrometry), ESCA (electron spectrometry for chemical analysis).  The course includes theory, application examples, and laboratory demonstrations.
EMSE 599	Critical Review of Materials Science and Engineering Colloquium	1 - 2 Units	Invited speakers deliver lectures on topics of active research in materials science.  Speakers include researchers at universities, government laboratories, and industry.  Each course offering is for 1 or 2 credits but the course can be taken multiple times totaling up to a maximum of six credits. Attendance is required. Graded coursework is in the form of a term paper per credit. The topic for the term paper(s) should be chosen from seminar topics. The term paper will be graded by the advisor of the graduate student.
EMSE 600T	Graduate Teaching III	0 Unit	To provide teaching experience for all Ph.D.-bound graduate students.  This will include preparing exam/quizzes/homework, leading recitation sessions, tutoring, providing laboratory assistance, and developing teaching aids that include both web-based and classroom materials.  Graduate students will meet with supervising faculty member throughout the semester.  Grading is pass/fail.  Students must receive three passing grades and up to two assignments may be taken concurrently. Recommended preparation: Ph.D. student in Materials Science and Engineering.
EMSE 601	Independent Study	1 - 18 Units	
EMSE 634	Special Topics of Materials Science	1 - 3 Units	This course introduces graduate students to specific topics of material science, tailored to individual interests of the students. For example, students with interest in specific techniques for microcharacterization of materials may be educated in the physical background of these techniques by studying literature under the guidance of the instructor, presenting and discussing the learned material with the instructor and other students, and being trained in practical experimentation in laboratory sessions demonstrating these techniques on instruments of SCSAM, the Swagelok Center for Surface Analysis of Materials.
EMSE 649	Special Projects	1 - 18 Units	
EMSE 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	Required for Master's degree. A research problem in metallurgy, ceramics, electronic materials, biomaterials or archeological and art historical materials, culminating in the writing of a thesis.
EMSE 695	Project M.S.	1 - 9 Units	Research course taken by Plan B M.S. students. Prereq: Enrolled in the EMSE Plan B MS Program.
EMSE 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	Required for Ph.D. degree. A research problem in metallurgy, ceramics, electronic materials, biomaterials or archeological and art historical materials, culminating in the writing of a thesis. Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
MATH 120	Elementary Functions and Analytic Geometry	3 Units	Polynomial, rational, exponential, logarithmic, and trigonometric functions (emphasis on computation, graphing, and location of roots) straight lines and conic sections. Primarily a precalculus course for the student without a good background in trigonometric functions and graphing and/or analytic geometry. Prereq: Three years of high school mathematics. Prereq:  No previous credit for MATH 121 or MATH 125.
MATH 121	Calculus for Science and Engineering I	4 Units	Functions, analytic geometry of lines and polynomials, limits, derivatives of algebraic and trigonometric functions. Definite integral, antiderivatives, fundamental theorem of calculus, change of variables. Recommended preparation: Three and one half years of high school mathematics. Credit for at most one of MATH 121, MATH 123 and MATH 125 can be applied to hours required for graduation. Counts for CAS Quantitative Reasoning Requirement. Prereq: MATH 120 or a score of 30 on the mathematics diagnostic test or exempt from the mathematics diagnostic test.
MATH 122	Calculus for Science and Engineering II	4 Units	Continuation of MATH 121. Exponentials and logarithms, growth and decay, inverse trigonometric functions, related rates, basic techniques of integration, area and volume, polar coordinates, parametric equations.  Taylor polynomials and Taylor's theorem.  Credit for at most one of MATH 122, MATH 124, and MATH 126 can be applied to hours required for graduation. Prereq: MATH 121,  MATH 123 or MATH 126.
MATH 124	Calculus II	4 Units	Review of differentiation. Techniques of integration, and applications of the definite integral. Parametric equations and polar coordinates. Taylor's theorem. Sequences, series, power series. Complex arithmetic. Introduction to multivariable calculus. Credit for at most one of MATH 122, MATH 124, and MATH 126 can be applied to hours required for graduation. Prereq: MATH 121 and placement by department.
MATH 125	Math and Calculus Applications for Life, Managerial, and Social Sci I	4 Units	Discrete and continuous probability; differential and integral calculus of one variable; graphing, related rates, maxima and minima. Integration techniques, numerical methods, volumes, areas. Applications to the physical, life, and social sciences. Students planning to take more than two semesters of introductory mathematics should take MATH 121. Recommended preparation: Three and one half years of high school mathematics. Credit for at most one of MATH 121, MATH 123, and MATH 125 can be applied to hours required for graduation. Counts for CAS Quantitative Reasoning Requirement. Prereq: MATH 120 or a score of 30 on the mathematics diagnostic test or exempt from the mathematics diagnostic test.
MATH 126	Math and Calculus Applications for Life, Managerial, and Social Sci II	4 Units	Continuation of MATH 125 covering differential equations, multivariable calculus, discrete methods. Partial derivatives, maxima and minima for functions of two variables, linear regression. Differential equations; first and second order equations, systems, Taylor series methods; Newton's method; difference equations. Credit for at most one of MATH 122, MATH 124, and MATH 126 can be applied to hours required for graduation. Prereq: MATH 121, MATH 123 or MATH 125.
MATH 201	Introduction to Linear Algebra for Applications	3 Units	Matrix operations, systems of linear equations, vector spaces, subspaces, bases and linear independence, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, diagonalization of matrices, linear transformations, determinants. Less theoretical than MATH 307.  Appropriate for majors in science, engineering, economics. Prereq: MATH 122, MATH 124 or MATH 126.
MATH 223	Calculus for Science and Engineering III	3 Units	Introduction to vector algebra; lines and planes. Functions of several variables: partial derivatives, gradients, chain rule, directional derivative, maxima/minima. Multiple integrals, cylindrical and spherical coordinates. Derivatives of vector valued functions, velocity and acceleration. Vector fields, line integrals, Green's theorem.  Credit for at most one of MATH 223 and MATH 227 can be applied to hours required for graduation. Prereq: MATH 122 or MATH 124.
MATH 224	Elementary Differential Equations	3 Units	A first course in ordinary differential equations. First order equations and applications, linear equations with constant coefficients, linear systems, Laplace transforms, numerical methods of solution.  Credit for at most one of MATH 224 and MATH 228 can be applied to hours required for graduation. Prereq: MATH 223 or MATH 227.
MATH 227	Calculus III	3 Units	Vector algebra and geometry. Linear maps and matrices. Calculus of vector valued functions. Derivatives of functions of several variables. Multiple integrals. Vector fields and line integrals.  Credit for at most one of MATH 223 and MATH 227 can be applied to hours required for graduation. Prereq: MATH 124 and placement by the department.
MATH 228	Differential Equations	3 Units	Elementary ordinary differential equations: first order equations; linear systems; applications; numerical methods of solution. Credit for at most one of MATH 224 and MATH 228 can be applied to hours required for graduation. Prereq: MATH 227 or placement by the department.
MATH 301	Undergraduate Reading Course	1 - 3 Units	Students must obtain the approval of a supervising professor before registration. More than one credit hour must be approved by the undergraduate committee of the department.
MATH 302	Departmental Seminar	3 Units	A seminar devoted to understanding the formulation and solution of mathematical problems. SAGES Department Seminar. Students will investigate, from different possible viewpoints, via case studies, how mathematics advances as a discipline--what mathematicians do. The course will largely be in a seminar format. There will be two assignments involving writing in the style of the discipline. Enrollment by permission (limited to majors depending on demand). Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
MATH 303	Elementary Number Theory	3 Units	Primes and divisibility, theory of congruencies, and number theoretic functions. Diophantine equations, quadratic residue theory, and other topics determined by student interest. Emphasis on problem solving (formulating conjectures and justifying them). Prereq: MATH 122 or MATH 124.
MATH 304	Discrete Mathematics	3 Units	A general introduction to basic mathematical terminology and the techniques of abstract mathematics in the context of discrete mathematics. Topics introduced are mathematical reasoning, Boolean connectives, deduction, mathematical induction, sets, functions and relations, algorithms, graphs, combinatorial reasoning. Offered as CSDS 302, ECSE 302 and MATH 304. Prereq: MATH 122 or MATH 124 or MATH 126.
MATH 305	Introduction to Advanced Mathematics	3 Units	A course on the theory and practice of writing, and reading mathematics.  Main topics are logic and the language of mathematics, proof techniques, set theory, and functions.  Additional topics may include introductions to number theory, group theory, topology, or other areas of advanced mathematics. Prereq: MATH 122, MATH 124 or MATH 126.
MATH 307	Linear Algebra	3 Units	A course in linear algebra that studies the fundamentals of vector spaces, inner product spaces, and linear transformations on an axiomatic basis. Topics include: solutions of linear systems, matrix algebra over the real and complex numbers, linear independence, bases and dimension, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, singular value decomposition, and determinants. Other topics may include least squares, general inner product and normed spaces, orthogonal projections, finite dimensional spectral theorem. This course is required of all students majoring in mathematics and applied mathematics. More theoretical than MATH 201. Prereq: MATH 122 or MATH 124.
MATH 308	Introduction to Abstract Algebra	3 Units	A first course in abstract algebra, studied on an axiomatic basis. The major algebraic structures studied are groups, rings and fields. Topics include homomorphisms and quotient structures. This course is required of all students majoring in mathematics. It is helpful, but not necessary, for a student to have taken MATH 307 before MATH 308. Prereq: MATH 122 or MATH 124.
MATH 319	Applied Probability and Stochastic Processes for Biology	3 Units	Applications of probability and stochastic processes to biological systems. Mathematical topics will include: introduction to discrete and continuous probability spaces (including numerical generation of pseudo random samples from specified probability distributions), Markov processes in discrete and continuous time with discrete and continuous sample spaces, point processes including homogeneous and inhomogeneous Poisson processes and Markov chains on graphs, and diffusion processes including Brownian motion and the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process.  Biological topics will be determined by the interests of the students and the instructor.  Likely topics include: stochastic ion channels, molecular motors and stochastic ratchets, actin and tubulin polymerization, random walk models for neural spike trains, bacterial chemotaxis, signaling and genetic regulatory networks, and stochastic predator-prey dynamics.  The emphasis will be on practical simulation and analysis of stochastic phenomena in biological systems.  Numerical methods will be developed using a combination of MATLAB, the R statistical package, MCell, and/or URDME, at the discretion of the instructor.  Student projects will comprise a major part of the course. Offered as BIOL 319, ECSE 319, MATH 319, SYBB 319, BIOL 419, EBME 419, MATH 419, PHOL 419, and SYBB 419. Prereq: MATH 224 or MATH 223 and BIOL 300 or BIOL 306 and MATH 201 or MATH 307 or consent of instructor.
MATH 321	Fundamentals of Analysis I	3 Units	Abstract mathematical reasoning in the context of analysis in Euclidean space.  Introduction to formal reasoning, sets and functions, and the number systems.  Sequences and series; Cauchy sequences and convergence.  Required for all mathematics majors. Additional work required for graduate students. (May not be taken for graduate credit by graduate students in the Department of Mathematics.) Offered as MATH 321 and MATH 421. Prereq: MATH 223 or MATH 227.
MATH 322	Fundamentals of Analysis II	3 Units	Continuation of MATH 321. Point-set topology in metric spaces with attention to n-dimensional space; completeness, compactness, connectedness, and continuity of functions.  Topics in sequences, series of functions, uniform convergence, Fourier series and polynomial approximation.  Theoretical development of differentiation and Riemann integration.  Required for all mathematics majors. Additional work required for graduate students.   (May not be taken for graduate credit by graduate students in the Department of Mathematics.) Offered as MATH 322 and MATH 422. Prereq: MATH 321.
MATH 324	Introduction to Complex Analysis	3 Units	Properties, singularities, and representations of analytic functions, complex integration. Cauchy's theorems, series residues, conformal mapping and analytic continuation. Riemann surfaces. Relevance to the theory of physical problems. Prereq: MATH 224 or MATH 228.
MATH 327	Convexity and Optimization	3 Units	Introduction to the theory of convex sets and functions and to the extremes in problems in areas of mathematics where convexity plays a role.  Among the topics discussed are basic properties of convex sets (extreme points, facial structure of polytopes), separation theorems, duality and polars, properties of convex functions, minima and maxima of convex functions over convex set, various optimization problems. Offered as MATH 327, MATH 427, and OPRE 427. Prereq: MATH 223 or MATH 227.
MATH 330	Introduction to Scientific Computing	3 Units	An introductory survey to Scientific Computing from principles to applications.  Topics which will be covered in the course include: solution of linear systems and least squares, approximation and interpolation, solution of nonlinear systems, numerical integration and differentiation, and numerical solution of differential equations.  Projects where the numerical methods are used to solve problems from various application areas will be assigned throughout the semester. Prereq: MATH 224 or MATH 228.  Coreq: MATH 201 or MATH 307.
MATH 332	Equations that Changed the World	3 Units	This course will introduce students to some of the fundamental equations that changed the worlds. One equation a week, the students will investigate the mathematics behind some of the most influential equations or ideas, e.g., the Fourier Transform, Maxwell's equations, Schrödinger's equation and the wave equation. Students will research the scientific and social climate in which the equations emerged, and report the impact that the equations have had on the way we see the world and live our lives today. The class will alternate between lectures, where the instructor introduce the mathematical background needed to state and understand for the equation, and presentations, in which the students will present the results of their investigations. The students will be required to write a term paper related to a particular equation and to give a final presentation. The grading will address both the mathematical maturity of the students and the organization and presentation of the paper. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: (MATH 223 or MATH 227) and (MATH 224 or 228).
MATH 333	Mathematics and Brain	3 Units	This course is intended for upper level undergraduate students in Mathematics, Cognitive Science, Biomedical Engineering, Biology or Neuroscience who have an interest in quantitative investigation of the brain and its functions.  Students will be introduced to a variety of mathematical techniques needed to model and simulate different brain functions, and to analyze the results of the simulations and of available measured data.  The mathematical exposition will be followed--when appropriate--by the corresponding implementation in Matlab.  The course will cover some basic topics in the mathematical aspects of differential equations, electromagnetism, Inverse problems and imaging related to brain functions.  Validation and falsification of the mathematical models in the light of available experimental data will be addressed.  This course will be a first step towards organizing the different brain investigative modalities within a unified mathematical framework.  Lectures will include a discussion portion.  A final presentation and written report are part of the course requirements. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: MATH 224 or MATH 228.
MATH 338	Introduction to Dynamical Systems	3 Units	Nonlinear discrete dynamical systems in one and two dimensions.  Chaotic dynamics, elementary bifurcation theory, hyperbolicity, symbolic dynamics, structural stability, stable manifold theory. Prereq: MATH 223 or MATH 227.
MATH 343	Theoretical Computer Science	3 Units	Introduction to different classes of automata and their correspondence to different classes of formal languages and grammars, computability, complexity and various proof techniques.   Offered as CSDS 343 and MATH 343. Prereq: MATH 304 and CSDS 310.
MATH 351	Senior Project for the Mathematics and Physics Program	2 Units	A two-semester course (2 credits per semester) in the joint B.S. in Mathematics and Physics program. Project based on numerical and/or theoretical research under the supervision of a mathematics faculty member, possibly jointly with a faculty member from physics. Study of the techniques utilized in a specific research area and of recent literature associated with the project. Work leading to meaningful results which are to be presented as a term paper and an oral report at the end of the second semester. Supervising faculty will review progress with the student on a regular basis, including detailed progress reports made twice each semester, to ensure successful completion of the work. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
MATH 352	Mathematics Capstone	3 Units	Mathematics Capstone Project. Students pursue theoretical, experimental, or teaching research under the supervision of a Capstone Advisor--ordinarily a member of the MAMS Department faculty.  Results and conclusions of the project are summarized in written form and in a public presentation, e.g., in the annual MAMS Capstone Symposium, or in the CWRU Intersections Symposium and Poster Sessions.   In order to register, a student must first obtain the consent of a Capstone Advisor.   Students are strongly encouraged to begin well in advance of registration to initiate discussions with a potential Capstone Advisor.  Before granting approval, an advisor may require a Capstone Proposal outlining the goals, expected background, methodology and time frame of the project. The determination as to whether the expectations for the Capstone Project and for the SAGES Capstone Requirement have been met are the sole responsibility of the Capstone Advisor. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
MATH 357	Mathematical Modeling Across the Sciences	3 Units	A three credit course on mathematical modeling as it applies to the origins sciences. Students gain practical experience in a wide range of techniques for modeling research questions in cosmology and astrophysics, integrative evolutionary biology (including physical anthropology, ecology, paleontology, and evolutionary cognitive science), and planetary science and astrobiology. Offered as ORIG 301, ORIG 401 and MATH 357. Prereq: ORIG 201, ORIG 202, BIOL 225, MATH 122, CHEM 106 and (PHYS 122 or PHYS 124).
MATH 363	Knot Theory	3 Units	An introduction to the mathematical theory of knots and links, with emphasis on the modern combinatorial methods.  Reidemeister moves on link projections, ambient and regular isotopies, linking number tricolorability, rational tangles, braids, torus knots, seifert surfaces and genus, the knot polynomials (bracket, X, Jones, Alexander, HOMFLY), crossing numbers of alternating knots and amphicheirality.  Connections to theoretical physics, molecular biology, and other scientific applications will be pursued in term projects, as appropriate to the background and interests of the students. Prereq: MATH 223 or MATH 227.
MATH 364	Geometry I	3 Units	An introduction to the various two-dimensional geometries, including Euclidean, spherical, hyperbolic, projective, and affine. The course will examine the axiomatic basis of geometry, with an emphasis on transformations. Topics include the parallel postulate and its alternatives, isometrics and transformation groups, tilings, the hyperbolic plane and its models, spherical geometry, affine and projective transformations, and other topics. We will examine the role of complex and hypercomplex numbers in the algebraic representation of transformations. The course is self-contained. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: MATH 224.
MATH 365	Introduction To Algebraic Geometry	3 Units	This is a first introduction to algebraic geometry--the study of solutions of polynomial equations-- for advanced undergraduate students.  Recent applications of this large and important area include number theory, combinatorics, theoretical physics, robotics, cryptology and coding theory. The contents of the course may vary from one semester to another, and may include, for example:  the classical theory of algebraic curves in the setting of affine and projective planes over the real or complex fields; affine and projective equivalence; invariants; tangents; singularities; intersection multiplicities; resultants and Bezout's Theorem; linear systems; rational curves; flexes and group structure on a cubic. Prereq: MATH 307 and Coreq: MATH 308.
MATH 376	Mathematical Analysis of Biological Models	3 Units	This course focuses on the mathematical methods used to analyze biological models, with examples drawn largely from ecology but also from epidemiology, developmental biology, and other areas.  Mathematical topics include equilibrium and stability in discrete and continuous time, some aspects of transient dynamics, and reaction-diffusion equations (steady state, diffusive instabilities, and traveling waves).  Biological topics include several "classic" models, such as the Lotka-Volterra model, the Ricker model, and Michaelis-Menten/type II/saturating responses.  The emphasis is on approximations that lead to analytic solutions, not numerical analysis.  An important aspect of this course is translating between verbal and mathematical descriptions: the goal is not just to solve mathematical problems but to extract biological meaning from the answers we find.   Offered as BIOL 306 and MATH 376. Prereq: BIOL 300 or MATH 224 or consent of instructor.
MATH 378	Computational Neuroscience	3 Units	Computer simulations and mathematical analysis of neurons and neural circuits, and the computational properties of nervous systems.  Students are taught a range of models for neurons and neural circuits, and are asked to implement and explore the computational and dynamic properties of these models.  The course introduces students to dynamical systems theory for the analysis of neurons and neural learning, models of brain systems, and their relationship to artificial and neural networks.  Term project required.  Students enrolled in MATH 478 will make arrangements with the instructor to attend additional lectures and complete additional assignments addressing mathematical topics related to the course.   Recommended preparation: MATH 223 and MATH 224 or BIOL 300 and BIOL 306. Offered as BIOL 378, COGS 378, MATH 378, BIOL 478, CSDS 478, EBME 478, ECSE 478, MATH 478 and NEUR 478.
MATH 380	Introduction to Probability	3 Units	Combinatorial analysis. Permutations and combinations. Axioms of probability. Sample space and events. Equally likely outcomes. Conditional probability. Bayes' formula. Independent events and trials. Discrete random variables, probability mass functions. Expected value, variance. Bernoulli, binomial, Poisson, geometric, negative binomial random variables. Continuous random variables, density functions. Expected value and variance. Uniform, normal, exponential, Gamma random variables. The De Moivre-Laplace limit theorem. Joint probability mass functions and densities. Independent random variables and the distribution of their sums. Covariance. Conditional expectations and distributions (discrete case). Moment generating functions. Law of large numbers. Central limit theorem. Additional topics (time permitting): the Poisson process, finite state space Markov chains, entropy. Prereq: MATH 223 or MATH 227.
MATH 382	High Dimensional Probability	3 Units	Behavior of random vectors, random matrices, and random projections in high dimensional spaces, with a view toward applications to data sciences.  Topics include tail inequalities for sums of independent random variables, norms of random matrices, concentration of measure, and bounds for random processes. Applications may include structure of random graphs, community detection, covariance estimation and clustering, randomized dimension reduction, empirical processes, statistical learning, and sparse recovery problems.  Additional work is required for graduate students. Offered as MATH 382, MATH 482, STAT 382 and STAT 482. Prereq: MATH 307 and (MATH 380 or STAT 345 or STAT 445).
MATH 386	Quantum Computing, Information, and Devices	3 Units	An introduction to the math, physics, engineering, and computer science underlying the rapidly emerging fields of quantum computing, quantum information, and quantum devices. The course is taught by a group of faculty from physics, engineering, computer science, and math, and is geared towards students with diverse backgrounds and interests in these fields.  Students will select a concentration in one of these four areas, and the coursework, while still covering all topics, will be adjusted to focus on the selected area in the most detail.  Note that the listed prerequisites depend on choice of concentration.   Topics will include: 1	(Mathematics) Introduction to linear algebra, convex geometry, fundamental theory of quantum information. 2	(Physics) Introduction to the quantum mechanics of two-level systems (qubits). Survey of physics and materials for qubit technologies. 3	(Computer Science) Basic quantum gates and circuits, introduction to the theory of algorithms, survey of quantum algorithms. 4	(Engineering) Quantum architectures, mapping algorithms onto circuits.  The course consists of lectures, homework, and group projects.  Group projects will aim to synthesize the diverse backgrounds of the students and instructors to capture the interdisciplinary nature of the field. Students taking the course for graduate credit will complete an additional literature research project and presentation, in addition to enhanced problem sets. Offered as CSDS 386, CSDS 486, ECSE 386, ECSE 486, MATH 386, MATH 486, PHYS 386, and PHYS 486. Prereq: (MATH 223 or MATH 227) and (MATH 224 or MATH 228) and (MATH 201 or MATH 307) and (PHYS 122 or PHYS 124) and PHYS 221.
MATH 394	Introduction to Information Theory	3 Units	This course is intended as an introduction to information and coding theory with emphasis on the mathematical aspects.  It is suitable for advanced undergraduate and graduate students in mathematics, applied mathematics, statistics, physics, computer science and electrical engineering.    Course content: Information measures-entropy, relative entropy, mutual information, and their properties.  Typical sets and sequences, asymptotic equipartition property, data compression.  Channel coding and capacity: channel coding theorem.  Differential entropy, Gaussian channel, Shannon-Nyquist theorem. Information theory inequalities (400 level). Additional topics, which may include compressed sensing and elements of quantum information theory. Recommended preparation: MATH 201 or MATH 307. Offered as MATH 394, CSDS 394, ECSE 394, MATH 494, CSDS 494 and ECSE 494. Prereq: MATH 223 and MATH 380 or requisites not met permission.
MATH 401	Abstract Algebra I	3 Units	Basic properties of groups, rings, modules and fields. Isomorphism theorems for groups; Sylow theorem; nilpotency and solvability of groups; Jordan-Holder theorem; Gauss lemma and Eisenstein's criterion; finitely generated modules over principal ideal domains with applications to abelian groups and canonical forms for matrices; categories and functors; tensor product of modules, bilinear and quadratic forms; field extensions; fundamental theorem of Galois theory, solving equations by radicals. Prereq: MATH 308.
MATH 402	Abstract Algebra II	3 Units	A continuation of MATH 401. Prereq: MATH 401.
MATH 405	Advanced Matrix Analysis	3 Units	An advanced course in linear algebra and matrix theory. Topics include variational characterizations of eigenvalues of Hermitian matrices, matrix and vector norms, characterizations of positive definite matrices, singular value decomposition and applications, perturbation of eigenvalues.  This course is more theoretical than MATH 431, which emphasizes computational aspects of linear algebra Prereq: MATH 307.
MATH 406	Mathematical Logic and Model Theory	3 Units	Propositional calculus and quantification theory; consistency and completeness theorems; Gödel incompleteness results and their philosophical significance; introduction to basic concepts of model theory; problems of formulation of arguments in philosophy and the sciences. Offered as PHIL 306, MATH 406 and PHIL 406.
MATH 408	Introduction to Cryptology	3 Units	Introduction to the mathematical theory of secure communication.  Topics include: classical cryptographic systems; one-way and trapdoor functions; RSA, DSA, and other public key systems; Primality and Factorization algorithms; birthday problem and other attack methods; elliptic curve cryptosystems; introduction to complexity theory; other topics as time permits. Recommended preparation: MATH 303.
MATH 419	Applied Probability and Stochastic Processes for Biology	3 Units	Applications of probability and stochastic processes to biological systems. Mathematical topics will include: introduction to discrete and continuous probability spaces (including numerical generation of pseudo random samples from specified probability distributions), Markov processes in discrete and continuous time with discrete and continuous sample spaces, point processes including homogeneous and inhomogeneous Poisson processes and Markov chains on graphs, and diffusion processes including Brownian motion and the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process.  Biological topics will be determined by the interests of the students and the instructor.  Likely topics include: stochastic ion channels, molecular motors and stochastic ratchets, actin and tubulin polymerization, random walk models for neural spike trains, bacterial chemotaxis, signaling and genetic regulatory networks, and stochastic predator-prey dynamics.  The emphasis will be on practical simulation and analysis of stochastic phenomena in biological systems.  Numerical methods will be developed using a combination of MATLAB, the R statistical package, MCell, and/or URDME, at the discretion of the instructor.  Student projects will comprise a major part of the course. Offered as BIOL 319, ECSE 319, MATH 319, SYBB 319, BIOL 419, EBME 419, MATH 419, PHOL 419, and SYBB 419.
MATH 421	Fundamentals of Analysis I	3 Units	Abstract mathematical reasoning in the context of analysis in Euclidean space.  Introduction to formal reasoning, sets and functions, and the number systems.  Sequences and series; Cauchy sequences and convergence.  Required for all mathematics majors. Additional work required for graduate students. (May not be taken for graduate credit by graduate students in the Department of Mathematics.) Offered as MATH 321 and MATH 421.
MATH 422	Fundamentals of Analysis II	3 Units	Continuation of MATH 321. Point-set topology in metric spaces with attention to n-dimensional space; completeness, compactness, connectedness, and continuity of functions.  Topics in sequences, series of functions, uniform convergence, Fourier series and polynomial approximation.  Theoretical development of differentiation and Riemann integration.  Required for all mathematics majors. Additional work required for graduate students.   (May not be taken for graduate credit by graduate students in the Department of Mathematics.) Offered as MATH 322 and MATH 422. Prereq: MATH 321 or MATH 421.
MATH 423	Introduction to Real Analysis I	3 Units	General theory of measure and integration. Measures and outer measures. Lebesgue measure on n-space. Integration. Convergence theorems. Product measures and Fubini's theorem. Signed measures. Hahn-Jordan decomposition, Radon-Nikodym theorem, and Lebesgue decomposition. SpaceP-integrable function. Lebesgue differentiation theorem in n-space. Prereq: MATH 322 or MATH 422.
MATH 424	Introduction to Real Analysis II	3 Units	Measures on locally compact spaces. Riesz representation theorem. Elements of functional analysis. Normed linear spaces. Hahn-Banach, Banach-Steinhaus, open mapping, closed graph theorems. Weak topologies. Banach-Alaoglu theorem. Function spaces. Stone-Weierstrass and Ascoli theorems. Basic Hilbert space theory. Application to Fourier series. Additional topics: Haar measure on locally compact groups. Prereq: MATH 423.
MATH 425	Complex Analysis I	3 Units	Analytic functions. Integration over paths in the complex plane. Index of a point with respect to a closed path; Cauchy's theorem and Cauchy's integral formula; power series representation; open mapping theorem; singularities; Laurent expansion; residue calculus; harmonic functions; Poisson's formula; Riemann mapping theorem. More theoretical and at a higher level than MATH 324. Prereq: MATH 322 or MATH 422.
MATH 427	Convexity and Optimization	3 Units	Introduction to the theory of convex sets and functions and to the extremes in problems in areas of mathematics where convexity plays a role.  Among the topics discussed are basic properties of convex sets (extreme points, facial structure of polytopes), separation theorems, duality and polars, properties of convex functions, minima and maxima of convex functions over convex set, various optimization problems. Offered as MATH 327, MATH 427, and OPRE 427.
MATH 431	Introduction to Numerical Analysis I	3 Units	Numerical linear algebra for scientists and engineers.  Matrix and vector norms, computer arithmetic, conditioning and stability, orthogonality.  Least squares problems: QR factorization, normal equations and Singular Value Decomposition. Direct solution of linear system: Gaussian elimination and Cholesky factorization.  Eigenvalues and eigenvectors: the QR algorithm, Rayleigh quotient, inverse iteration.  Introduction to iterative methods.  Students will be introduced to MATLAB. Prereq: MATH 201 or MATH 307.
MATH 432	Numerical Differential Equations	3 Units	Numerical solution of differential equations for scientists and engineers. Solution of ordinary differential equations by multistep and single step methods. Stability, consistency, and convergence.  Stiff equations.  Finite difference schemes.  Introduction to the finite element method.  Introduction to multigrid techniques.  The diffusion equation: numerical schemes and stability analysis.  Introduction to hyperbolic equations.  MATLAB will be used in this course. Prereq: MATH 224 or MATH 228.
MATH 433	Numerical Solutions of Nonlinear Systems and Optimization	3 Units	The course provides an introduction to numerical solution methods for systems of nonlinear equations and optimization problems. The course is suitable for upper-undergraduate and graduate students with some background in calculus and linear algebra. Knowledge of numerical linear algebra is helpful. Among the topics which will be covered in the course are Nonlinear systems in one variables; Newton's method for nonlinear equations and unconstrained minimization; Quasi-Newton methods; Global convergence of Newton's methods and line searches; Trust region approach; Secant methods; Nonlinear least squares. Prereq: MATH 223 or MATH 227, and MATH 431 or permission.
MATH 435	Ordinary Differential Equations	3 Units	A second course in ordinary differential equations.  Existence, uniqueness, and continuation of solutions of ODE.  Linear systems, fundamental matrix, qualitative methods (phase plane).  Dependence on initial data and parameters (Gronwall's inequality, nonlinear variation of parameters).  Stability for linear and nonlinear equations, linearization, Poincare-Bendixson theory.  Additional topics may include regular and singular perturbation methods, autonomous oscillations, entrainment of forced oscillators, and bifurcations. Prereq: MATH 224 and either MATH 201 or MATH 307.
MATH 439	Bayesian Scientific Computing	3 Units	This course will embed numerical methods into a Bayesian framework. The statistical framework will make it possible to integrate a prori information about the unknowns and the error in the data directly into the most efficient numerical methods. A lot of emphasis will be put on understanding the role of the priors, their encoding into fast numerical solvers, and how to translate qualitative or sample-based information--or lack thereof--into a numerical scheme. Confidence on computed results will also be discussed from a Bayesian perspective, at the light of the given data and a priori information. The course should be of interest to anyone working on signal and image processing statistics, numerical analysis and modeling. Recommended Preparation: MATH 431. Offered as MATH 439 and STAT 439.
MATH 440	Computational Inverse Problems	3 Units	This course will introduce various computational methods for solving inverse problems under different conditions.  First the classical regularization methods will be introduced, and the computational challenges which they pose, will be addressed.  Following this, the statistical methods for solving inverse problems will be studied and their computer implementation discussed.  We will combine the two approaches to best exploit their potentials. Applications arising from various areas of science, engineering, and medicine will be discussed throughout the course.
MATH 441	Mathematical Modeling	3 Units	Mathematics is a powerful language for describing real world phenomena and providing predictions that otherwise are hard or impossible to obtain.  The course gives the students pre-requisites for translating qualitative descriptions given in the professional non-mathematical language into the quantitative language for mathematics.  While the variety in the subject matter is wide, some general principles and methodologies that a modeler can pursue are similar in many applications.  The course focuses on these similarities.  The course is based on representative case studies that are discussed and analyzed in the classroom, the emphasis being on general principles of developing and analyzing mathematical models.  The examples will be taken from different fields of science and engineering, including life sciences, environmental sciences, biomedical engineering and physical sciences.  Modeling relies increasingly on computation, so the students should have basic skills for using computers and programs like Matlab or Mathematica. Prereq: MATH 224 or MATH 228.
MATH 444	Mathematics of Data Mining and Pattern Recognition	3 Units	This course will give an introduction to a class of mathematical and computational methods for the solution of data mining and pattern recognition problems.   By understanding the mathematical concepts behind algorithms designed for mining data and identifying patterns, students will be able to modify to make them suitable for specific applications.  Particular emphasis will be given to matrix factorization techniques.  The course requirements will include the implementations of the methods in MATLAB and their application to practical problems. Prereq: MATH 201 or MATH 307.
MATH 445	Introduction to Partial Differential Equations	3 Units	Method of characteristics for linear and quasilinear equations. Second order equations of elliptic, parabolic, type; initial and boundary value problems. Method of separation of variables, eigenfunction expansions, Sturm-Liouville theory. Fourier, Laplace, Hankel transforms; Bessel functions, Legendre polynomials. Green's functions. Examples include: heat diffusion, Laplace's equation, wave equations, one dimensional gas dynamics and others. Appropriate for seniors and graduate students in science, engineering, and mathematics. Prereq: MATH 201 or MATH 307 and MATH 224 or MATH 228.
MATH 446	Numerical Methods for Partial Differential Equations	3 Units	This course is an introduction to numerical methods of PDEs, and in particular, to finite element methods (FEM), emphasizing the interconnection between the functional analytic viewpoint of PDEs and the practical and effective computation of the numerical approximations.  In particular, the emphasis is on showing that many of the useful and elegant ideas in finite dimensional linear algebra have a natural counterpart in the infinite dimensional setting of Hilbert spaces, and that the same techniques that guarantee the existence and uniqueness of the solutions in fact provide also stable computational methods to approximate the solutions.  The topics covered in this course include Fourier analysis, weak derivatives, weak forms, generalized functions; Sobolev spaces, trace theorem, compact embedding theorems, Poincare inequalities; Riesz theory, Fredholm theory; Finite Element Method (FEM): Grid generation, existence, stability and convergence of solutions for elliptic problems; Semi-discretization of parabolic and hyperbolic equations; Stiffness; Numerical solution of linear systems by iterative methods.  A quintessential part of this course comprises numerical implementation of the finite element method. Matlab is used as the programming tool both in demonstrations and examples in the class as well as in home assignments.  Recommended Preparation: linear algebra, multivariate calculus, and ordinary differential equations.
MATH 449	Dynamical Models for Biology and Medicine	3 Units	Introduction to discrete and continuous dynamical models with applications to biology and medicine.  Topics include: population dynamics and ecology; models of infectious diseases; population genetics and evolution; biological motion (reaction-diffusion and chemotaxis); Molecular and cellular biology (biochemical kinetics, metabolic pathways, immunology).  The course will introduce students to the basic mathematical concepts and techniques of dynamical systems theory (equilibria, stability, bifurcations, discrete and continuous dynamics, diffusion and wave propagation, elements of system theory and control).  Mathematical exposition is supplemented with introduction to computer tools and techniques (Mathematica, Matlab). Prereq: MATH 224 or MATH 228, or BIOL/EBME 300, and MATH 201.
MATH 461	Introduction to Topology	3 Units	Metric spaces, topological spaces, and continuous functions. Compactness, connectedness, path connectedness. Topological manifolds; topological groups. Polyhedra, simplical complexes. Fundamental groups. Prereq: MATH 224 or MATH 228.
MATH 462	Algebraic Topology	3 Units	The fundamental group and covering spaces; van Kampen's theorem. Higher homotopy groups; long-exact sequence of a pair. Homology theory; chain complexes; short and long exact sequences; Mayer-Vietoris sequence. Homology of surfaces and complexes; applications. Prereq: MATH 461.
MATH 465	Differential Geometry	3 Units	Manifolds and differential geometry. Vector fields; Riemannian metrics; curvature; intrinsic and extrinsic geometry of surfaces and curves; structural equations of Riemannian geometry; the Gauss-Bonnet theorem. Prereq: MATH 321.
MATH 467	Differentiable Manifolds	3 Units	Differentiable manifolds and structures on manifolds. Tangent and cotangent bundle; vector fields; differential forms; tensor calculus; integration and Stokes' theorem. May include Hamiltonian systems and their formulation on manifolds; symplectic structures; connections and curvature; foliations and integrability. Prereq: MATH 322.
MATH 473	Introduction to Mathematical Image Processing and Computer Vision	3 Units	This course introduces fundamental mathematics techniques for image processing and computer vision (IPCV).  It is accessible to upper level undergraduate and graduate students from mathematics, sciences, engineering and medicine.  Topics include but are not limited to image denoising, contrast enhancement, image compression, image segmentation and pattern recognition.  Main tools are discrete Fourier analysis and wavelets, plus some statistics, optimization and a little calculus of variation and partial differential equations if time permitting.  Students gain a solid theoretical background in IPCV modeling and computing, and master hands-on application experiences.  Upon completion of the course, students will have clear understanding of classical methods, which will help them develop new methodical approaches for imaging problems arising in a variety of fields.  Recommended preparation:  Some coursework in scientific computing and ability to program in (or willingness to learn) a language such as Matlab or C/C++. Prereq: MATH 330 or MATH 431 or equivalent.
MATH 478	Computational Neuroscience	3 Units	Computer simulations and mathematical analysis of neurons and neural circuits, and the computational properties of nervous systems.  Students are taught a range of models for neurons and neural circuits, and are asked to implement and explore the computational and dynamic properties of these models.  The course introduces students to dynamical systems theory for the analysis of neurons and neural learning, models of brain systems, and their relationship to artificial and neural networks.  Term project required.  Students enrolled in MATH 478 will make arrangements with the instructor to attend additional lectures and complete additional assignments addressing mathematical topics related to the course.   Recommended preparation: MATH 223 and MATH 224 or BIOL 300 and BIOL 306. Offered as BIOL 378, COGS 378, MATH 378, BIOL 478, CSDS 478, EBME 478, ECSE 478, MATH 478 and NEUR 478.
MATH 482	High Dimensional Probability	3 Units	Behavior of random vectors, random matrices, and random projections in high dimensional spaces, with a view toward applications to data sciences.  Topics include tail inequalities for sums of independent random variables, norms of random matrices, concentration of measure, and bounds for random processes. Applications may include structure of random graphs, community detection, covariance estimation and clustering, randomized dimension reduction, empirical processes, statistical learning, and sparse recovery problems.  Additional work is required for graduate students. Offered as MATH 382, MATH 482, STAT 382 and STAT 482. Prereq: Graduate student standing.
MATH 486	Quantum Computing, Information, and Devices	3 Units	An introduction to the math, physics, engineering, and computer science underlying the rapidly emerging fields of quantum computing, quantum information, and quantum devices. The course is taught by a group of faculty from physics, engineering, computer science, and math, and is geared towards students with diverse backgrounds and interests in these fields.  Students will select a concentration in one of these four areas, and the coursework, while still covering all topics, will be adjusted to focus on the selected area in the most detail.  Note that the listed prerequisites depend on choice of concentration.   Topics will include: 1	(Mathematics) Introduction to linear algebra, convex geometry, fundamental theory of quantum information. 2	(Physics) Introduction to the quantum mechanics of two-level systems (qubits). Survey of physics and materials for qubit technologies. 3	(Computer Science) Basic quantum gates and circuits, introduction to the theory of algorithms, survey of quantum algorithms. 4	(Engineering) Quantum architectures, mapping algorithms onto circuits.  The course consists of lectures, homework, and group projects.  Group projects will aim to synthesize the diverse backgrounds of the students and instructors to capture the interdisciplinary nature of the field. Students taking the course for graduate credit will complete an additional literature research project and presentation, in addition to enhanced problem sets. Offered as CSDS 386, CSDS 486, ECSE 386, ECSE 486, MATH 386, MATH 486, PHYS 386, and PHYS 486. Prereq: (MATH 223 or MATH 227) and (MATH 224 or MATH 228) and (MATH 201 or MATH 307) and (PHYS 122 or PHYS 124) and PHYS 221.
MATH 491	Probability I	3 Units	Probabilistic concepts. Discrete probability, elementary distributions. Measure theoretic framework of probability theory. Probability spaces, sigma algebras, expectations, distributions. Independence. Classical results on almost sure convergence of sums of independent random variables. Kolmogorov's law of large numbers. Recurrence of sums. Weak convergence of probability measures. Inversion, Levy's continuity theorem. Central limit theorem. Introduction to the central limit problem. Prereq: MATH 322.
MATH 492	Probability II	3 Units	Conditional expectations. Discrete parameter martingales. Stopping times, optional stopping. Discrete parameter stationary processes and ergodic theory. Discrete time Markov processes. Introduction to continuous parameter stochastic processes. Kolmogorov's consistency theorem. Gaussian processes. Brownian motion theory (sample path properties, strong Markov property, Martingales associated to Brownian motion, functional central limit theorem). Prereq: MATH 491.
MATH 494	Introduction to Information Theory	3 Units	This course is intended as an introduction to information and coding theory with emphasis on the mathematical aspects.  It is suitable for advanced undergraduate and graduate students in mathematics, applied mathematics, statistics, physics, computer science and electrical engineering.    Course content: Information measures-entropy, relative entropy, mutual information, and their properties.  Typical sets and sequences, asymptotic equipartition property, data compression.  Channel coding and capacity: channel coding theorem.  Differential entropy, Gaussian channel, Shannon-Nyquist theorem. Information theory inequalities (400 level). Additional topics, which may include compressed sensing and elements of quantum information theory. Recommended preparation: MATH 201 or MATH 307. Offered as MATH 394, CSDS 394, ECSE 394, MATH 494, CSDS 494 and ECSE 494.
MATH 497	Stochastic Models: Time Series and Markov Chains	3 Units	Introduction to stochastic modeling of data. Emphasis on models and statistical analysis of data with a significant temporal and/or spatial structure.  This course will analyze time and space dependent random phenomena from two perspectives:  Stationary Time Series: Spectral representation of deterministic signals, autocorrelation.  Power spectra.  Transmission of stationary signals through linear filters. Optimal filter design, signal-to-noise ratio.  Gaussian signals and correlation matrices. Spectral representation and computer simulation of stationary signals.  Discrete Markov Chains:  Transition matrices, recurrences and the first step analysis.  Steady rate.  Recurrence and ergodicity, empirical averages.  Long run behavior, convergence to steady state.  Time to absorption.  Eigenvalues and nonhomogeneous Markov chains.  Introduction to Gibbs fields and Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC).  This course is related to STAT 538 but can be taken independently of it. Offered as: MATH 497 and STAT 437. Prereq: STAT 312 or STAT 312R or STAT 313 or STAT 332 or STAT 333 or STAT 345 or MATH 380 or MATH 491 or (STAT 243 and STAT 244) or Requisites Not Met permission.
MATH 499	Special Topics	3 Units	Special topics in mathematics.
MATH 528	Analysis Seminar	1 - 3 Units	Continuing seminar on areas of current interest in analysis.  Allows graduate and advanced undergraduate students to become involved in research. Topics will reflect interests and expertise of the faculty and may include functional analysis, convexity theory, and their applications. May be taken more than once for credit. Consent of department required.
MATH 535	Applied Mathematics Seminar	1 - 3 Units	Continuing seminar on areas of current interest in applied mathematics.  Allows graduate and advanced undergraduate students to become involved in research.  Topics will reflect interests and expertise of the faculty and may include topics in applied probability and stochastic processes, continuum mechanics, numerical analysis, mathematical physics or mathematical biology.  May be taken more than once for credit.
MATH 598	Stochastic Models: Diffusive Phenomena and Stochastic Differential Equations	3 Units	Introduction to stochastic modeling of data.  Emphasis on models and statistical analysis of data with significant temporal and/or spatial structure.  This course will analyze time and space dependent random phenomena from two perspectives: Brownian motion and diffusive processes: Classification of stochastic processes, finite dimensional distributions, random walks and their scaling limits, Brownian motion and its paths properties, general diffusive processes, Fokker-Planck-Kolmogorov equations, Poisson and point processes, heavy tail diffusions, Levy processes, tempered stable diffusions.  Stochastic calculus and stochastic differential equations: Wiener random integrals, mean-square theory, Brownian stochastic integrals and Ito formula, stochastic integrals for Levy processes, martingale property, basic theory and applications of stochastic differential equations.  This course is related to STAT 437 but can be taken independently of it. Offered as MATH 598 and STAT 538.
MATH 601	Reading and Research Problems	1 - 18 Units	Presentation of individual research, discussion, and investigation of research papers in a specialized field of mathematics.
MATH 651	Thesis (M.S.)	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
MATH 701	Dissertation (Ph.D.)	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
ARTS 101	Design and Color I	3 Units	Organizational and structural projects as a basis for the development of style. Studies in line, texture, shape, space, value, color, and two dimensional composition through studio problems, art studio media and techniques.
ARTS 106	Creative Drawing I	3 Units	Development of graphic fluency in black and white through direct observation of nature and the model. Drawing as a means of enlarging visual sensitivity using a wide range of media and subject matter.  Work from nude model.
ARTS 150	Introduction To New Media Art	3 Units	This studio course explores the theories and practices of screen-based new media art. Students will manipulate video, audio, images and text to create new media artworks. The class will use free, open source tools as well as Adobe Creative Cloud apps. This class will examine the emerging culture of contemporary new media art and its historical antecedents. There are no prerequisites. Students will need to provide their own laptops and purchase access to Creative Cloud apps through UTech.
ARTS 201	Design and Color II	3 Units	Continuation of ARTS 101.  Composition: three-dimensional projects.  Advanced work in the properties and uses of color and materials. Prereq: ARTS 101.
ARTS 206	Creative Drawing II	3 Units	Continuation of ARTS 106. Advanced work in graphic representation. Development of visual acuity and a personal drawing style while working in color. Work from nude model. Prereq: ARTS 106.
ARTS 210	Enameling and Jewelry I	3 Units	Techniques in the application of vitreous enamel on copper and of constructed metal jewelry. Technical skill and suitability of design as applied to the medium.
ARTS 212	Weaving, Fibers, and Textiles I	3 Units	Learn basic concepts and methods for designing textile surfaces: fabric painting and dyeing.  Construct textiles using off-loom weaving and interlacing techniques.  Emphasis on development of technical skills, application of design concepts and personal expression.
ARTS 214	Ceramics I	3 Units	The techniques of hand building in pinch, coil and slab methods.  Development of sensitivity to design and form.  Basic work in stoneware, earthenware, and glazing.
ARTS 216	Painting I	3 Units	The creative, conceptual, visual, and technical aspects of painting. Style ranging from naturalism to abstraction.  Work in acrylic and mixed media.
ARTS 220	Photography Studio I	3 Units	Camera, film, and darkroom techniques. Development of basic black and white perceptual and photographic skills. Darkroom and photographic field and lab work. 35mm camera required.
ARTS 286	Introduction to Video Game Design	3 Units	Game design creates meaningful play through interactive experiences.  This introductory studio-based course explores games through the development and creation of 2D video games.  The course aims to provide a critical vocabulary and  historical context for analyzing games and gaming theory and focuses on the skills and techniques necessary to develop 2D video games.
ARTS 295	Contemporary Approaches to Teaching Art	3 Units	This course introduces teacher candidates to contemporary approaches to and practices for the teaching of art in elementary, middle, and secondary school settings. Teacher candidates develop age-appropriate original art curricula that address significant themes and issues in the lives of students and the communities in which they live. Teacher candidates learn current instructional methods designed to meet the needs of contemporary learners, and authentic strategies for assessing learning.  Local, state, and national learning standards will also be covered.
ARTS 300	Art For Different Futures	3 Units	The movements for social justice (Black Lives Matter, Me Too) are rapidly and dynamically altering long-held conceptions about the role of art in society. The culture industries (along with many other sectors) have been forced to re-examine the viability and utility of their current models, and the assumptions these models are predicated upon. Art institutions are in the process of reconciling their complicated and often contradictory relationship with white, sexist, ableist, and classist ideology, in which they have tacitly perpetuated dominant structures and perspectives while rhetorically advocating for reform and radical change. In this course, we will explore this contemporary cultural moment and unravel the seismic changes that have brought uncertainty to the art world. We will speculate potential futures free of racism, sexism, homophobia, ableism, and classism, and the role that art could play within those possible futures. And we will explore alternative models of artmaking with the potential to instigate those futures through a focus on social engagement, community, and radical inclusion. Offered as ARTS 300 and ARTS 400.
ARTS 301	Video Art: Experimental Approaches to Time-Based Meaning-Making And Personal Expression	3 Units	This course explores unconventional and experimental approaches to meaning-making through the medium of video. Since its introduction in the 1970s, artists have used video technology to push against and critique the constraints of traditional art mediums and narrative forms of cinema and television. The accessibility and low-cost of the video medium affords artists the freedom to express intimately personal views and lived experiences and to develop radical and unorthodox approaches to time-based art-making.  Students will learn to use video as an experimental and expressive medium to explore personal experience and sociopolitical views. They will manipulate and play with space, time, and form. And most importantly, students will gain a greater understanding of the possibilities and potential of the moving image to respond to, comment upon and critique traditional media forms and texts. Offered as ARTS 301 and ARTS 401. Prereq: ARTS 101 or ARTS 150.
ARTS 302	Architecture and City Design I	3 Units	The social spatial, and aesthetic elements in architecture; the components of the building: the window, door, roof, enclosing walls, and character of interior and exterior space. Projects related to small, intimate scale and residential structures. Lectures, field trips, studio experiences. Recommended ARTS 101 or ARTS 106 courses prior to enrollment. Offered as ARTS 302 and ARTS 402.
ARTS 303	Architecture and City Design II	3 Units	The social, spatial, and aesthetic elements of the urban setting of architecture, the organizational components of the city, the path, the node, the edge, and the grid. Projects related to large-scale and public buildings and their relationship to the encompassing visual world. Lectures, field trips, studio experiences. Recommended ARTS 101 or ARTS 106 courses prior to enrollment. Offered as ARTS 303 and ARTS 403.
ARTS 304	Architecture and City Design III	3 Units	A study of historic precedents and the social implications of modern and contemporary architecture including analysis and form interpretation as it relates to building and materials technologies. Practical application and synthesis of architectural knowledge through site visits and research of local and regional architecture. Discussions of historic and contemporary architects, engineers and significant architecture and engineering firms. Prereq: ARTS 302 and ARTS 303.
ARTS 307	Emerging Technology in Art + Design Education	3 Units	This course focuses on the integration of emerging technologies into art and design education. The teaching of digital technologies appropriate for young people, adolescents, and adults in formal K-12 classroom settings and informal learning environments will be highlighted. Students will gain hands-on experience with creating expressive art in a variety of emerging technologies and media. Strategies for integrating emerging media into art and design curriculum will also be explored. Offered as ARTS 307 and ARTS 407. Prereq: ARTS 101.
ARTS 310	Enameling and Jewelry II	3 Units	Continuation of ARTS 210.  Advanced enameling and jewelry techniques applied to copper or silver, cloisonne, champleve, basse taille, plique-jour.  Creative use of design principles and jewelry techniques. Prereq: ARTS 210.
ARTS 312	Weaving, Fibers, and Textiles II	3 Units	Continuation of ARTS 212.  Exploration of a selected area of textiles in surface design or constructed textiles.  Development of a personal aesthetic through design and execution of a series of projects. Prereq: ARTS 212.
ARTS 314	Ceramics II	3 Units	Continuation of ARTS 214. Problematic approach to technical aspects of ceramics; experience in wheel throwing and option of hand-building. Experimentation with glaze and clay body formulation available. Prereq: ARTS 214.
ARTS 316	Painting II	3 Units	The creative, conceptual, visual and technical aspects of painting.  Styles ranging from expressionism, cubism, surrealism and abstraction.  Work in acrylic and mixed media leading to the development of personal painting style. Prereq: ARTS 216.
ARTS 320	Photography Studio II	3 Units	Continuation of ARTS 220. Advanced theory and black and white techniques.  Development of personal aesthetic encouraged.  Field work.  35mm camera required. Prereq: ARTS 220.
ARTS 322	Digital Photography I	3 Units	Introduction of color and digital photography.  A systematic approach to the digital photography workflow and its application to creative photography.  History of the medium.  Field and computer lab work.  Advanced amateur digital camera required. Prereq: ARTS 220.
ARTS 323	Creative Digital Photography II	3 Units	Creative Digital Photography II:  Advanced theory and techniques of the digital photography workflow and its application to creative photography.  Field and computer lab work.  Advanced amateur digital camera and access to Photoshop CS6 required. Prereq: ARTS 322.
ARTS 325	Creative Photography	3 Units	Creative photography through photographing and responding to photographs.  The question of self-expression and photographic medium explored in the pursuit of understanding images. Prereq: ARTS 220 and ARTS 320 or ARTS 322.
ARTS 365	Capstone Seminar for Art Teachers	4 Units	Student teacher candidates will critically reflect upon their concurrent student teaching experiences, contextualizing those experiences within and connecting those experiences with the art teaching practices they have learned in the program. Topics covered will include organization and management of a K- 12 art program, including planning, development, and evaluation of teaching materials, lessons, and units. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: ARTS 295 or ARTS 602, and ARTS 393 or ARTS 493. Coreq: ARTS 366A and ARTS 366B or ARTS 466A and ARTS 466B.
ARTS 365B	Design and Color	3 Units	Advanced design projects determined in consultation with instructor. Prereq: ARTS 101 and ARTS 201.
ARTS 365C	Enameling and Jewelry	3 Units	Advanced enameling and jewelry projects determined in consultation with instructor. Prereq: ARTS 210 and ARTS 310.
ARTS 365D	B&W Photography Studio	3 Units	Advanced black and white projects determined in consultation with instructor. Prereq: ARTS 220 and ARTS 320.
ARTS 365G	Ceramics	3 Units	Advanced ceramics projects determined in consultation with instructor. Prereq: ARTS 214 and ARTS 314.
ARTS 366A	Student Teaching in Art: Pre-K - 6th Grade	4 Units	Teaching art for early childhood, elementary, and middle school students in a school setting.  Includes art curriculum development, implementation, and assessment.  Professional standards and practices. Offered as ARTS 366A and ARTS 466A. Prereq: ARTS 295, ARTS 300, ARTS 385, ARTS 386, ARTS 387, and ARTS 393.  Coreq: ARTS 366B and ARTS 465.
ARTS 366B	Student Teaching in Art: 7th - 12th Grade	4 Units	Teaching adolescents and young adults art in a school setting.  Includes art curriculum development, implementation, assessment and classroom management.  Professional standards and practices. Offered as ARTS 366B and ARTS 466B. Prereq: ARTS 295, ARTS 300, ARTS 385, ARTS 386, ARTS 387 and ARTS 393. Coreq: ARTS 366A and ARTS 465.
ARTS 385	Clinical Experiences	3 Units	This course provides teacher candidates with opportunities to observe, analyze, teach, and evaluate in elementary and secondary settings. Teacher candidates build constructive relationships with K­12 students, faculty, staff, and community members at two clinical placement sites through guided observation engagement. This experience provides groundwork, connections, and continuity to student teaching. Prereq: ARTS 295 or ARTS 602.
ARTS 393	Understanding Curriculum	3 Units	This course provides an overview of curriculum theory by exploring curricula as historical, cultural, social, and political texts and practices. Students will interrogate the ways in which curriculum often reifies and propagates knowledge, values and beliefs that benefit the dominant culture and reinforce the normalcy of competitive capitalistic ideals, racial hierarchies, the exploitation of nature and oppressive gender binaries. Critical approaches to curriculum that defy and challenge these hegemonic conceptions of curriculum will be examined. Through the process of these explorations, students will develop an understanding of how curriculum shapes the social, political, emotional, psychological, and physical structures in which teaching and learning occur. Students will learn how to develop multilayered art curriculum that critically addresses urgent and crucial topics and themes marginalized by or neglected within contemporary K-12 curriculum. Offered as ARTS 393 and ARTS 493. Prereq: ARTS 295.
ARTS 399	Independent Study in Art Studio	1 - 3 Units	Independent Study in Art Studio; by permit of Director only.
ARTS 400	Art For Different Futures	3 Units	The movements for social justice (Black Lives Matter, Me Too) are rapidly and dynamically altering long-held conceptions about the role of art in society. The culture industries (along with many other sectors) have been forced to re-examine the viability and utility of their current models, and the assumptions these models are predicated upon. Art institutions are in the process of reconciling their complicated and often contradictory relationship with white, sexist, ableist, and classist ideology, in which they have tacitly perpetuated dominant structures and perspectives while rhetorically advocating for reform and radical change. In this course, we will explore this contemporary cultural moment and unravel the seismic changes that have brought uncertainty to the art world. We will speculate potential futures free of racism, sexism, homophobia, ableism, and classism, and the role that art could play within those possible futures. And we will explore alternative models of artmaking with the potential to instigate those futures through a focus on social engagement, community, and radical inclusion. Offered as ARTS 300 and ARTS 400.
ARTS 401	Video Art: Experimental Approaches to Time-Based Meaning-Making And Personal Expression	3 Units	This course explores unconventional and experimental approaches to meaning-making through the medium of video. Since its introduction in the 1970s, artists have used video technology to push against and critique the constraints of traditional art mediums and narrative forms of cinema and television. The accessibility and low-cost of the video medium affords artists the freedom to express intimately personal views and lived experiences and to develop radical and unorthodox approaches to time-based art-making.  Students will learn to use video as an experimental and expressive medium to explore personal experience and sociopolitical views. They will manipulate and play with space, time, and form. And most importantly, students will gain a greater understanding of the possibilities and potential of the moving image to respond to, comment upon and critique traditional media forms and texts. Offered as ARTS 301 and ARTS 401.
ARTS 402	Architecture and City Design I	3 Units	The social spatial, and aesthetic elements in architecture; the components of the building: the window, door, roof, enclosing walls, and character of interior and exterior space. Projects related to small, intimate scale and residential structures. Lectures, field trips, studio experiences. Recommended ARTS 101 or ARTS 106 courses prior to enrollment. Offered as ARTS 302 and ARTS 402.
ARTS 403	Architecture and City Design II	3 Units	The social, spatial, and aesthetic elements of the urban setting of architecture, the organizational components of the city, the path, the node, the edge, and the grid. Projects related to large-scale and public buildings and their relationship to the encompassing visual world. Lectures, field trips, studio experiences. Recommended ARTS 101 or ARTS 106 courses prior to enrollment. Offered as ARTS 303 and ARTS 403.
ARTS 407	Emerging Technology in Art + Design Education	3 Units	This course focuses on the integration of emerging technologies into art and design education. The teaching of digital technologies appropriate for young people, adolescents, and adults in formal K-12 classroom settings and informal learning environments will be highlighted. Students will gain hands-on experience with creating expressive art in a variety of emerging technologies and media. Strategies for integrating emerging media into art and design curriculum will also be explored. Offered as ARTS 307 and ARTS 407. Prereq: ARTS 101.
ARTS 466A	Student Teaching in Art: Pre-K - 6th Grade	4 Units	Teaching art for early childhood, elementary, and middle school students in a school setting.  Includes art curriculum development, implementation, and assessment.  Professional standards and practices. Offered as ARTS 366A and ARTS 466A. Prereq: ARTS 385, ARTS 386, ARTS 387, ARTS 400, ARTS 493, and ARTS 602. Coreq: ARTS 465 and ARTS 466B.
ARTS 466B	Student Teaching in Art: 7th - 12th Grade	4 Units	Teaching adolescents and young adults art in a school setting.  Includes art curriculum development, implementation, assessment and classroom management.  Professional standards and practices. Offered as ARTS 366B and ARTS 466B. Prereq: ARTS 385, ARTS 386, ARTS 387, ARTS 400, ARTS 493, and ARTS 602. Coreq: ARTS 465 and ARTS 466A.
ARTS 493	Understanding Curriculum	3 Units	This course provides an overview of curriculum theory by exploring curricula as historical, cultural, social, and political texts and practices. Students will interrogate the ways in which curriculum often reifies and propagates knowledge, values and beliefs that benefit the dominant culture and reinforce the normalcy of competitive capitalistic ideals, racial hierarchies, the exploitation of nature and oppressive gender binaries. Critical approaches to curriculum that defy and challenge these hegemonic conceptions of curriculum will be examined. Through the process of these explorations, students will develop an understanding of how curriculum shapes the social, political, emotional, psychological, and physical structures in which teaching and learning occur. Students will learn how to develop multilayered art curriculum that critically addresses urgent and crucial topics and themes marginalized by or neglected within contemporary K-12 curriculum. Offered as ARTS 393 and ARTS 493. Prereq: ARTS 602.
ARTS 497	Summer Workshop in Art Education	3 Units	A current art education issue is covered in depth.
ARTS 602	Contemporary Approaches to Teaching Art	3 Units	This course introduces teacher candidates to contemporary approaches to and practices for the teaching of art in elementary, middle, and secondary school settings. Teacher candidates develop age-appropriate original art curricula that address significant themes and issues in the lives of students and the communities in which they live. Teacher candidates learn current instructional methods designed to meet the needs of contemporary learners, and authentic strategies for assessing learning. Local, state, and national learning standards will be covered. Teacher candidates will also collaboratively research emerging trends in child and adolescent education and contemporary artmaking relevant to the teaching of K-12 studio art.
ARTS 605	Final Creative Thesis	1 - 3 Units	Students receive individual guidance for an approved self-designed creative project from program faculty members. A public exhibition or presentation is required.  By permit only.
MBAC 500	Probability, Statistics, and Quantitative Methods	0 Unit	This 0 credit hour pass/fail course is designed to provide MBA students with all of the basic statistics and mathematics background material, as well as some experience with EXCEL and the statistics software package SPSS, that is needed in a number of their required core courses. Prereq: Full-time MBA program only.
MBAC 501A	Design Thinking in Management	1 Unit	How did LEGO rise from the brink of bankruptcy and rejuvenate a once fraying toy business? By seeking to more thoroughly understand the value of toys. How did the company conduct this pursuit? By observing children playing and then talking with them about what was seen. How did Samsung over the last decade become the world largest television manufacturer? By understanding the value of electronic screens. How did it gain new insights about them? By going to consumers' residences and observing how individuals and families (and other groups) use their televisions in their own home settings. These companies and many others, Amazon, Apple, Chick-fil-A, Geek Squad (before acquired by Best Buy), Netflix, and Starbucks, have embraced design as a business discipline responsible for identifying opportunities to create new value through the innovation of goods, services, and experiences. This course offers to equip you with basic design frameworks, methods, and tools to enhance the knowledge and skills gained in other courses and concentrations within Weatherhead's MBA program. Successful business leaders in the 21st century will need to possess a working knowledge of design as a part of their management acumen. Knowing how to think innovatively in the face of wickedly complex challenges, for one's business, organization, and industry, within the broader cultural milieu of customers "lives" will surely distinguish exemplary business leaders from lesser performers. Whether your career finds you serving within a multinational corporation or an entrepreneurial start-up, a governmental agency or non-profit enterprise, the ability to be innovative and creative upon demand will be a crucial skill. These seminar workshops aim to convince you that such is indeed are learnable skills, and to provide a foundation for further developing your design thinking over time. Prereq: Full time MBA student.
MBAC 501B	Professional Development and Career Strategy	.5 Unit	The Professional Development and Career Strategy course is designed to help MBA students prepare for the interview and job search process. Your LEAD course taken in the first semester of the first year will allow you to take a deeper dive and self-reflect on what you desire for your career and life, align your vision and values, and develop a plan.  The Professional Development and Career Strategy course will support you in executing the career aspects of your plan and further develop those areas which you have discovered will prevent you from moving forward in obtaining the career you desire.   Part A of the course will include four modules: Personal Brand and Positioning, Networking, Interview Skills, and Job Search Strategy.  Prior to the start of the course, a one-on-one career readiness and career leader assessment, resume review and an intercultural training and communication session will take place so that during the fall semester you can focus on networking, enhancing interview skills and developing and executing your job search strategy.   Throughout the course, students will focus on their career goals and objectives within the context of self to develop their positioning and value proposition statement, social media presence, supporting collateral, and an effective job search strategy.  With a greater sense of self discovered in the LEAD course and your value proposition statement, you will be immersed in the interview process to gain an understanding of the various types of interviews (behavioral, case style and technical), the competencies being evaluated, how to prepare for each and develop competency through consistent practice and feedback.  To measure improvement at the end of the year, a baseline assessment of your interview skills will be conducted by an industry professional. Executive presence and communication skills topics will be incorporated throughout the course to improve likelihood of success during the job search process and beyond.   This course will be taught by the career development and placement teams and industry and alumni guest speakers to offer a real-world perspective.  In addition to the course, you will have access to: 1	Leadership Coaching:  Leadership Coaching is provided through the LEAD course.  As you determine your direction and plan, you will have access to additional facilitated discussions to further explore/discover your options for your career and life.   2	Career Advising:  Career advising is provided by the Career Development and Placement teams.  You will receive practical guidance on the "how" to execute your career strategy. Prereq: Full time MBA Student.
MBAC 501C	Business as an Agent of World Benefit	1 Unit	The relationship between business and society, and the search for mutually beneficial advances between industry and the world's most pressing challenges, has become one of the defining issues of the 21st century. In every sector, immense entrepreneurial creativity is used to create a better world. Positive entrepreneurial energy is growing in direct proportion to the growing crises of our times.  Industrial facilities and corporate buildings are being designed in ways that give back more clean energy than they use. Bottom-of-the-pyramid strategies and micro-enterprise models are helping to eradicate extreme poverty. Companies are designing supply chains that leave behind zero waste, only "waste-as-food" that becomes a cost-saving input for other industries. Powered by artificial intelligence, products and services are helping to solve social, health, and climate-related challenges. What research studies are documenting -including The Business of Building a Better World: The Leadership Revolution that is Changing Everything (Cooperrider and Selian, 2022. Berrett-Koehler), The Base of the Pyramid Promise (London, 2016. Stanford University Press), Embedded Sustainability: The Next Big Competitive Advantage (Laszlo and Zhexembayeva, 2011. Stanford University Press), Flourishing Enterprise (Laszlo et. al., 2014. Stanford University Press), Reimagining Capitalism in a World on Fire (Henderson, 2020. Public Affairs/Hachette)-is that, one-by-one, positive disruptions are erasing the false dichotomy embedded in "the great trade-off illusion", the belief that firms must sacrifice financial performance if they choose to strategically address societal, environmental, and wellbeing challenges.  It is in such a context that this MBA course explores one overarching proposition: that business, the motor of our society, has the opportunity to be the most positive and creative force on the planet, a force that contributes to the well-being of many as we transition to a sustainable world economy.  Our search is for "business as an agent of world benefit": what does it look like, where is it happening, what are the market, societal and leadership enablers, and what are the business results and value propositions involved? And most important: how does this help each of you, as MBA students, to become leaders in the managerial, executive, and entrepreneurial roles you will occupy; ready to "win the future" and succeed in a marketplace where "doing well by doing good" is fast becoming the new normal. Prereq: Full time MBA students.
MBAC 501D	Professional Development and Career Strategy	.5 Unit	The Professional Development and Career Strategy course is designed to help MBA students prepare for their career post MBA.  Your LEAD course taken in the first semester of the first year will allow you to take a deeper dive and self-reflect on what you desire for your career and life, align your vision and values, and develop a plan.  The Professional Development and Career Strategy course will support you in executing the career aspects of your plan and further develop those areas which you have discovered will prevent you from moving forward in obtaining the career you desire.   Part B of the course will focus on three modules including Interview Skills, Job Search Strategy (for Career) and Executive Presence and Communications.  You will continue to refine your interview skills for behavioral, case style and technical interviews through consistent practice and feedback to advance your interviewing skills.  This process will conclude with a year-end assessment of your progress conducted by an industry professional.  Additionally, you will have an opportunity to refine your presentation skills as well as refresh your resume and job search strategy plan. The course will be taught by the career development and placement teams and industry and alumni guest speakers to offer a real-world perspective.   In addition to the course, you will have access to: 1	Leadership Coaching:  Leadership Coaching is provided through the LEAD course.  As you determine your direction and plan, you will have access to additional facilitated discussions to further explore/discover your options for your career and life.   2	Career Advising:  Career advising is provided by the Career Development and Placement teams.  You will receive practical guidance on the "how" to execute your career strategy. Prereq: Full time MBA Student and MBAC 501B.
MBAC 502	Financial Accounting	3 Units	This course covers financial accounting: concepts, principles, and analyses.  The major emphasis is development of an understanding of accounting information and reporting to enable you to be an effective manager. Although considerable importance is placed on the evaluation, interpretation, and analysis of accounting information for decision making: the fundamentals of accounting measurement and disclosure are also covered. Prereq: Full-time MBA program only.
MBAC 503	Managerial Accounting	1.5 Unit	This course focuses on managerial accounting. Upon completion of the course, students should be comfortable with the following: -understanding the basics of commonly used costing methods. -creating and analyzing a budget. -analyzing departmental, divisional and corporate performance. -using data to make business decisions using managerial accounting techniques, and understanding the basic concepts of management decision analysis and the related vocabulary. Specifically, the course helps provide some answers to the following questions: -How is management accounting information prepared and reported, and how can it be understood and analyzed? -How can the analysis of management accounting and other data help management better understand the drivers of the company's financial performance, the strengths and weaknesses of the company's operations and management, and the risks and opportunities facing it? -How can the analysis of financial and other management information enable management to make the best decisions to address the risks and opportunities of its operations? The goal of this class is to move you from simply "doing the work and forgetting it" to helping you gain knowledge and a basic skill set that you will be able to apply to real-life opportunities. Prereq: Full-time MBA program and (MBAP 402 or MBAC 502).
MBAC 504	Corporate Finance I	3 Units	This is a MBA core finance course.  In this course, students are introduced to the basics of corporate finance, including the objectives of and the decisions made by corporate financial managers.  Topics covered include time value of money, stock and bond valuation, cost of capital, risk and return, investment decision rules, cash flows and free cash flows, cash flow projections and planning, and capital budgeting.  Other topics may be covered from time to time. Prereq: Full-time MBA program only.
MBAC 505	Corporate Finance II	1.5 Unit	This is an MBA core finance course.  The objective of the course is to strengthen students' conceptual understanding and problem-solving skills in corporate finance.  Topics covered include cash flows and valuation, financial planning and ratio analysis, financing using internal and external sources including public offerings, capital budgeting and managerial options, capital structure, payout policy, working capital management, and financial planning and strategy.  Topics could change from semester to semester.  The course envisages use of case studies, excel spreadsheets, and simulation exercises. Prereq: MBAC 504.
MBAC 506	Marketing Management	3 Units	Through lecture, discussion, cases, projects and/or simulations you will learn theory and practice of how firms develop processes to understand, create and deliver "triple bottom line" value (i.e., economic, social and environmental) to business and/or consumer markets. Specifically in this course, we take the perspective that marketing is a process of creating value for firms, customers, and other stakeholders through mutually desirable exchanges. This is the foundation of a customer orientation and a central theme of market-driven management. Methods for strategic marketing planning, understanding buyer behavior, market analysis, segmentation and devising integrated marketing programs are introduced. Prereq: Full-time MBA program only.
MBAC 507	Operations and Supply Chain Management	3 Units	Operations and supply chain managers, ranging from supervisors to vice presidents, are concerned with the production of goods and services. More specifically, they are responsible for designing, running, controlling and improving the systems to deliver their goods or services timely and efficiently.  This course is a broad-spectrum course with emphasis on techniques and information that are helpful to the practice of management in general and at any level. Through lectures, case discussions, and experiential learning in simulations and educational games, we will discuss commonly occurring application problems such as bottleneck identification, capacity planning, inventory control, bullwhip effect, supply chain design, etc. We will examine operations and supply chain management in a variety of contexts including manufacturing systems, financial companies, hospitals, start-ups, and apparel industries. Also we will explore the interface of operations and supply chain management with other functional areas such as marketing, finance, accounting, etc. This course is not oriented toward specialists in operations and supply chain management. Its goal is to introduce you to the basic concepts, to develop your business intuition about operations and supply chain management, to help you understand the day-to-day challenges in this area, and to provide you with the tools to address these challenges. Prereq: Full-time MBA program only.
MBAC 508	Strategic Issues and Applications	3 Units	Strategic management deals fundamentally with the ways firms build and sustain superior competitive positions and profitability.  Successful strategy design and implementation requires an understanding of a firm's external environment, its internal resources and capabilities.  It also requires an integrative view of the firm that spans functional areas such as operations, marketing and finance.  Strategic analysis draws on a number of academic disciplines including economics, psychology, political and management science. Prereq: Full-time MBA program only.
MBAC 511	Statistics and Decision Modeling	3 Units	This course provides the foundations of statistical and operations research methodologies for managerial decision-making. Topics covered include using sample data to (a) estimate quantities of interest and create confidence intervals, (b) perform hypothesis tests, and (c) make forecasts with simple and multiple regression. Decision modeling involves using mathematical models to provide a quantitative approach to analyzing and solving complex decision problems and includes an introduction to linear and integer programming models and applications, queuing models, and simulation models, all solved by appropriate computer software packages. Prereq or Coreq: MBAC 500.  Prereq: Full-time MBA program.
MBAC 512	Economics	3 Units	This course is designed to give you an overview and a basic understanding of modern economics.  The course will cover the microeconomic topics of consumer choice, business decision making, and market equilibrium; as well as the macroeconomic topics of economic growth, inflation, interest rates, and exchange rates. In the process of achieving these specific content objectives, this course is taught in a way that will support the MBA program goals of having students become competent analysts and a critical, creative thinkers. Prereq: Full-time MBA program only.
MBAC 515	Leading People and Organizations	3 Units	The primary objective of this course is to develop students' capability to be effective leaders and life-long learners.  Drawing upon the field of organizational behavior, the course examines leadership effectiveness on three levels: developing the leader from the inside out, working effectively with diverse teams and leading effectively in organizations.  Topics include resonant leadership, emotional intelligence, coaching relationships, team learning and development, employee engagement, diversity and inclusion and organizational culture.  Students will work in diverse learning teams and complete a personal vision, receive 360-degree feedback on their emotional and social competence and create a personalized learning plan to guide their development throughout the MBA program and beyond.  Leadership development coaches meet privately with each student twice throughout the semester and students become peer coaches for classmates.  Fundamentally, this course is about developing the leader within so that each individual is best positioned to lead and manage others effectively. Prereq: Full-time MBA program only.
MBAC 518	Business Analytics	3 Units	Companies, government agencies, and nonprofit organizations can collect prodigious amounts of data with relative ease, but the data become insights only after they are organized, analyzed, and communicated. Substantial evidence exists to indicate that the demand for analytics trained managers outstrips current supply, and will continue to remain strong in the foreseeable future.  Using analytics tools to use data to create insights is a prerequisite to effective management. Building on your first course in statistics, in this course you will be introduced to other useful analytical tools (e.g., Predictive Modeling, Data Mining, and Data Visualization). The course will also introduce commonly used software tools. Prereq: MBAC 511.
MBAP 400	Probability, Statistics, and Quantitative Methods	0 Unit	This course is the no-cost, online program that helps students acquire and/or refresh the following probability, statistics, mathematics, and computer skills that are essential for success in the MBA program.  Topics include: - Statistics: Descriptive Statistics (summarizing and explaining data). Probability (modelling randomness and variability using probability ideas). Sampling (mean, standard deviation, and the role of the Central Limit Theorem). -Algebra and Math: a self-guided review is provided of functions and their graphical representations, linear equations, and exponentials and logarithms.  -Computer Skills: the basic use of SPSS and EXCEL for statistical analysis.  This course is designed for incoming MBA students who have not taken a formal course in probability and statistics, have taken such a course long ago and need to refresh this knowledge, or are not confident with basic probability, statistics and mathematics.  This course is a required prerequisite for the first-year Statistics course. It is also assumed that you have the knowledge of the material in MBAP 400 for the core courses (especially Finance, Marketing, and Accounting) and is not reviewed in any of those courses.  Recommended Preparation: Knowledge of high school mathematics and the basics of using EXCEL (such as writing formulas, copying cells and formulas, and so on). Prereq: Enrolled in the MBA Program.
MBAP 400H	Probability, Statistics, and Quantitative Methods	1.5 Unit	This course helps students squire and/or refresh the following probability, statistics, mathematics, and computer skills that are essential for effectives managers in a healthcare system. Topics include: Descriptive Statistics (summarizing and explaining data), Probability (modeling randomness and variability using probability ideas) Sampling (mean, standard deviation, and the role of the Central Limit Theorem), Linear equations and exponentials. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 401	Leadership Assessment and Development	3 Units	This main objective of this course is to help students deepen their self-awareness and to prepare them to be effective leaders and life-long learners.  The course is based on a model of self-directed learning and development, which encourages students to discover and expand their emotional intelligence and leadership potential.  Students are encouraged to reflect and learn through a series of activities, assessment exercises, and small and large group discussions.  Students will complete a personal vision, receive 360-degree feedback on their emotional and social competence and create a personalized learning plan to guide their development throughout the MBA program.  Leadership development coaches will meet with each student twice throughout the semester.   Fundamentally, this course is about developing the leader within each person so that he or she can lead and manage others effectively. Prereq: This course is for students in the Part-time Cohort MBA Program.
MBAP 401H	Leadership Assessment and Development	3 Units	This main objective of this course is to help students deepen their self-awareness and to prepare them to be effective leaders and life-long learners. The course is based on a model of self-directed learning and development, which encourages students to discover and expand their emotional intelligence and leadership potential. Students are encouraged to reflect and learn through a series of activities, assessment exercises, and small and large group discussions. Students will complete a personal vision, receive 360-degree feedback on their emotional and social competence and create a personalized learning plan to guide their development throughout the MBA program. Leadership development coaches will meet with each student during the  semester. Fundamentally, this course is about developing the leader within each person so that he or she can lead and manage others effectively within a healthcare setting. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 402	Financial and Managerial Accountancy	3 Units	This course will cover the use and application of basic financial statements, the basic cost structures in a firm, and decision making using accounting information.  We will discuss usage and analysis of information from the annual report, focusing on the balance sheet, income statement, cash flow statement and related notes.  The course will also cover internally generated accounting information about the cost structure of the firm.  We will discuss use of this information in decision making.  You are expected to be comfortable with definitions of basic accounting terms, and you should be familiar with the accounting structure and the financial statements. Prereq: This course is for students in the Part-time Cohort MBA Program only.
MBAP 402H	Accounting for Managers	3 Units	The course introduces graduate management students to accounting's role in business administration.  Students learn that accounting is not math, truth, or putting numbers in to boxes.  Instead, accounting is an imprecise language used to send and receive information about economic performance.  Every language has its quirks, and accounting is no exception.  Any communication problem that arises from use of English may reveal itself when one uses accounting.  This course sensitizes students to common communication problems and suggests ways that they may be mitigated. A metaphor for the class is taking a one-semester introductory course in a foreign language.  A semester's worth of study does not make one fluent.  However, successful completion of the course allows motivated students, over the balance of their careers, to cultivate the ability to read, write, speak, and listen to that language.  Time invested lays a foundation for accelerated learning.  Highly motivated students eventually become fluent, while others are better able to use the language in everyday life Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 403	Statistics and Decision Modeling	3 Units	This course provides the foundations of statistical and operations research methodologies for managerial decision-making.  Business statistics focuses on statistical thinking as one of the fundamentals of effective management.  Topics covered include sampling and the normal distribution, making inferences from data via confidence intervals and hypothesis tests, and analyzing relationships between samples.  Decision modeling of organizational systems uses mathematical and computer models to provide a quantitative perspective on identifying, analyzing and solving complex decision problems.  This course includes an introduction to linear programming models and applications, simulation techniques in decision-making, and project management. Prereq: Students in the Part-time Cohort MBA Program and successful completion of MBAP 400.
MBAP 403H	Statistics and Decision Modeling	3 Units	The primary objective of this course, and a goal of the part-time MBA Program, is to make you a competent analyst by providing you with the ability to use, and to communicate with those who use, certain quantitative approaches to help make informed decisions for your organizations. A secondary objective is to provide you with the quantitative knowledge and skills that are needed in other MBA courses. The two groups of quantitative techniques are statistics and decision modeling.  The objective of statistics is to summarize and present information contained in data sets, to draw conclusions about large populations based only on information obtained from samples, and, using these conclusions, to obtain reliable forecasts of quantities of interest. Among other things, statistical analysis provides many of the data needed in decision modeling. At the end of this part of the course you will be able to: 1	Summarize data sets using either graphical techniques (histograms, pie charts, and so on) or descriptive statistics (mean, median, standard deviation, and so on). 2	Use computer software to develop estimates and confidence intervals for means and proportions, and analyze the tradeoff between sample size and estimation risk. 3	Use sample data either to support or reject claims about a large population; understand the concepts and consequences of type-1 and type-2 errors. 4	Analyze relationships between two or more quantities of interest and use these relationships to make intelligent forecasts. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 404	Managing People and Organizations	3 Units	Examines the behavioral sciences relevant to the effective management of people and the effective design of human resources system, structure and policies.  Topics include leadership, change management, motivation and pay systems, team dynamics, staffing, decision making, organizational communications, employee participation, performance appraisal, conflict management, negotiation, work design, organizational design, and organizations culture.  A variety of methods, including experiential and interactive learning methods, are used to study these topics. Prereq: This course is for students in the Part-time Cohort MBA Program.
MBAP 404H	Managing People and Organizations	3 Units	In today's increasingly complex and fast-paced environment, it is critical to understand how to maximize organizational performance. All organizations (corporations, non-profits, government) aim to achieve some goal or objective (e.g., increase shareholder value, make a profit, provide a service). People and systems are the vehicles by which an organization accomplishes its goals and objectives. This course is designed to enhance your ability to make well-reasoned decisions about human capital in organizations and to help you understand organizations as complex systems. Being able to apply systems thinking is critical in order to maximize individual, team and organizational performance. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 405	Financial Management I	3 Units	This is a Corporate Finance course that deals with investment theory and financial value.  The course materials cover discounted cash flows, bond and stock valuation, capital budgeting, applications of real options in investment analysis, asset's risk and return, cost of capital, market efficiency and capital structure.  The tools, problem solving techniques, and ways of thinking that you develop in this course have broad applicability to all areas of business.  They also form the basis for sensible personal decisions in the areas of investments, borrowing, and financial planning. Prereq: This course is for students in the Part-time Cohort MBA Program.
MBAP 405H	Financial Management	3 Units	The purpose of this class is to introduce you to multiple concepts in Corporate Finance with the aim of providing principles and tools that enable you to make managerial decisions that increase the firm's value.  The course will begin by building a foundation in understand the time value of money and its many applications, and then move on to various tools used to evaluate sound investment decision making.  Students will also gain an understanding of how securities (different claims on the business) are evaluated and valued, including an in-depth treatment of risk vs. expected return, i.e., the notion that a more risky investment requires a higher expected return.  We will then revisit corporate financial analysis first taught in financial accounting. The course will conclude with fundamental corporate valuation techniques.  This portion of the class integrate topics learned earlier in the course, will build linkages to other courses (especially financial accounting) and reinforce what drives value as a manager within the enterprise. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 406	Economics for Managers	3 Units	This course is designed to give you an overview and a basic understanding of modern economics.  The course will cover the microeconomic topics of consumer choice, business decision making, and market equilibrium; as well as the macroeconomic topics of economic growth, inflation, interest rates, and exchange rates. In the process of achieving these specific content objectives, this course is taught in a way that will support the MBA program goals of having students become competent analysts and a critical, creative thinkers. Prereq: This course is for students in the Part-time Cohort MBA Program.
MBAP 406H	Economics for Managers	3 Units	This course offers an introduction to the theories, principles, and applications of microeconomics and macroeconomics. Topics include supply and demand, elasticity, market structure analysis, business cycles, taxation, and monetary policy. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 407	Managerial Marketing	3 Units	Through lecture, discussion, cases, projects and/or simulations you will learn theory and practice of how firms develop processes to understand, create and deliver "triple bottom line" value (i.e., economic, social and environmental) to business and/or consumer markets. Specifically in this course, we take the perspective that marketing is a process of creating value for firms, customers, and other stakeholders through mutually desirable exchanges. This is the foundation of a customer orientation and a central theme of market-driven management. Methods for strategic marketing planning, understanding buyer behavior, market analysis, segmentation and devising integrated marketing programs are introduced. Prereq: This course is for students in the Part-time Cohort MBA Program.
MBAP 407H	Managerial Marketing	3 Units	This course will focus on Marketing Strategy in business organizations. We will use case studies and discussions as the primary mode of learning. To get the most out of this course, it is important that you come to class well prepared with your case analysis.  The course objectives emphasize MBA program-level goals aimed at:  1. Creative and critical thinking and action in the face of ambiguity 2. Development and implementation of strategies to secure sustainable competitive advantage, and 3. Rigorous analytics Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 408	Operations Management	3 Units	Operations management deals with the design of products and processes, the acquisition of resources, the conversion of inputs to outputs, and the distribution of goods and services.  It is central to a firm's ability to compete effectively.  As global competition in both goods and services increases, the management of operations is becoming more and more important.  This course provides a broad overview of the managerial issues associated with production and delivery of goods and services.  It includes the use of quantitative modeling using computers as a central methodology. Prereq: This course is for students in the Part-time Cohort MBA Program.
MBAP 408H	Operations and Supply Chain Management	3 Units	Operations managers, ranging from supervisors to vice presidents, are concerned with the production of goods and services. More specifically, they are responsible for designing, running, controlling and improving the systems that accomplish production.  This course is a broad-spectrum course with emphasis on techniques and information that are helpful to the practice of management in general and at any level. We will discuss commonly occurring application problems such as capacity planning, production scheduling, line balancing, inventory control, quality management, just-in-time concepts, etc.  The field of operations management was originally concerned with manufacturing systems.  But many of the same ideas apply, and the same trade-offs are present, in service organizations like health care, insurance, hotel-management, airlines and government related operations. Several manufacturing and non-manufacturing environments will be discussed explicitly, and the emphasis will be on the fundamentals of the operations function in an organization. Also we will explore the interface of operations management with other functional areas such as marketing, finance, accounting, etc. This course is not oriented toward specialists in operations management. Its goal is to introduce you to the environments and help you appreciate the problems that operations managers are confronted with. Then, we will typically discuss some system specifics and emphasize the principles and issues that play key role in their management. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 409	Sustainability and Social Entrepreneurship	3 Units	This course creates a foundational platform featuring key models and managerial tools for building sustainable value and "turning the social and global issues of our day into business opportunities." Case studies of leading mainstream companies are used to analyze how business value is created for a range of social and environmental initiatives. Students will look at sustainability business strategies that reduce risks, drive down costs, create new revenue streams, serve new markets, and position companies to take advantage of changing societal expectations. Environmental issues such as climate change are covered along with social issues such as global poverty. Students acquire the competencies required to make effective business decisions based on integrating sustainability into the core of a company's value added activities. Prereq: This course is for students in the Part-time Cohort MBA Program.
MBAP 410	Strategic Issues and Applications	3 Units	This course helps students understand the nature of strategic competitiveness and helps them develop the ability to analyze the competitive environment facing any organization, assess the attractiveness of the industry or sector and isolate potential sources of competitive advantage which will aid in developing a positioning strategy for the organization.
MBAP 410H	Strategic Issues and Applications	3 Units	Strategic Management deals fundamentally with the ways firms build and sustain superior competitive positions and profitability.  Successful strategy design and implementation requires an understanding of a firm's external environment, its internal resources and capabilities.  It also requires an integrative view of the firm that spans functional areas such as operations, marketing and finance.  Strategic analysis draws on a number of academic disciplines including economics, psychology, political and management science. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 411	Identifying Design Opportunities	3 Units	Designing is giving form to an idea for a more desirable product, service, process or organization, and refining the idea into something that can be delivered reliably and efficiently. Good design integrates these evolving ideas with the day-to-day realities of a firms' operations, systems, marketing, economics, finance and human resources. Designing is thus a unique managerial activity that brings together changing technologies, capabilities, relationships, activities and materials to shape an organization's plans and strategies. It combines analysis and synthesis to create opportunities for improvement and means of attaining them. Viewed this way, designing is a core competence of a successful entrepreneur or innovative leader. Design analysis is the systematic review of the four orders of design found in every firm--namely, the firm's communications, products, interactions and environments--and the creation of opportunities to increase firm value by improving each. Students will identify ill-defined, ill-structured problems within organizations. Such problems are ones for which there are no definitive formulations and for which the formulation chosen affects the solutions available. For such problems, there is no explicit way of knowing when you have reached a solution, and solutions cannot necessarily be considered correct or incorrect. But finding innovative solutions to such problems can provide unique opportunities to create exceptional value.  A major outcome of the semester's inquiry is a presentation of the design problem and proposed design solution. Prereq: This course is for students in the Part-time Cohort MBA Program.
MBAP 420H	Regulatory Issues in Healthcare Management	1.5 Unit	This course provides and overview of key areas health law at level important to managers in healthcare related organizations. The topical areas covered include (1) the history, structure, financing, and operation of the U.S. medical system; (2) legal and ethical rules and regulations governing physicians and other health care professionals; the patient-physician relationship; institutional providers of care such as hospitals, nursing homes, and laboratories; and drug and device manufacturers; (3) regulation of health insurers and managed care organization; (4) medical malpractice law; (5) confidentiality and electronic medical records; (6) fraud and abuse; (7) antitrust law; (8) employer health plans; (9) medical research; and (10) public health. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 421H	Organizational Culture in Healthcare Management	1.5 Unit	In this residency course, students will analyze corporate culture using the Burke-Litwin model. Culture in relation to other factors of organizational functioning and change. Prior to the on campus residency students will be introduced to factors that influence organizational culture such the external environment, vision & mission, leadership style, organizational structure, systems (HR such as recruiting and reward and IT such as administrative records keeping), management practices & climate, and power, politics and influence. During the on campus residency, students will visit two major hospital systems to examine how culture influences operational decision making. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 422H	Digital Innovation in Healthcare	1.5 Unit	In this course, students will learn the role of digital technology in creating new digitally enabled services in the healthcare market. Industry experts will be engaged throughout the course to provide the latest information on developments and application being used. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 423H	Engineering in Healthcare Management	1.5 Unit	The course focuses on the creation, funding, and management of digital health, biotech, medtech, and other health services enterprises. The course is  will focus on special issues surrounding the conceptualization, planning, diligence, and capitalization of these ventures and also includes management and compensation practices. In addition, course offers methods for self-assessment & development of business models and plans, techniques for technology assessment and strategy, develops foundation for capitalization and partnering strategies, and creates a basis for best practices in company launch and plan execution. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 424H	Economic Issues and Applications in Healthcare	1.5 Unit	The purpose of this course is to develop the analytical skills necessary for understanding how the U.S. health care sector operates, how it has evolved, the forces at work behind perceived deficiencies (in quality and cost control), and the impact of alternative policy proposals. Special attention is giving to recent developments in the healthcare marketplace, and the strategic considerations they create for providers and insurers. These issues are addressed through the lens of microeconomic theory. Under this framework, outcomes result from the interaction of decisions made by participants in the healthcare economy (e.g. patients, providers, insurers, government), with those decisions governed by the preferences, incentives and resource constraints facing each decision-maker. Principles of microeconomics will be reviewed as necessary to ensure consistent understanding of basic concepts. The course is designed to appeal to a broad audience, particularly students interested in healthcare management, public health, medical innovation, health law, and public policymaking. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 425H	Experiential Learning in Healthcare	3 Units	In this residency based course students will have an opportunity to apply their learning to real world projects in collaboration with a major hospital system in the Cleveland area. Students will learn how to conduct an action research project including problem identification, stakeholder engagement, needs assessment, intervention design, data collection, data analysis, and the presentation of recommendations/findings. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 426H	Finance Issues and Applications in Healthcare	1.5 Unit	Exploration of economic, medical, financial and payment factors in the U.S. healthcare system sets the framework for the study of decisions by providers, insurers, and purchasers in this course. The mix of students from various programs and professions allows wide discussion from multiple viewpoints. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 427H	Introduction to Population Health	1.5 Unit	This course ntroduces graduate students to the multiple determinants of health including the social, economic and physical environment, health services, individual behavior, genetics and their interactions. It aims to provide students with the broad understanding of the research development and design for studying population health, the prevention and intervention strategies for improving population health and the disparities that exist in morbidity, mortality, functional and quality of life. Format is primarily group discussion around current readings in the field. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 428H	Healthcare Decision Making and Analytics	3 Units	This course is designed to introduce the students to a wide range of methods and applications of decision science and analytics in healthcare management and medical decision making. The primary objective of the course is to provide the students with the necessary technical knowledge and skills to understand mathematical and statistical models used in health decision making. Further, the course aims to provide the students with hands-on experience required to leverage such methods for evaluating clinical interventions, choosing the best treatment, and informing public health policy. Course topics include decision trees, Markov decision models, Monte Carlo simulation, cost-effectiveness analysis, sensitivity analysis, utility theory, bootstrapping and subgroup analysis, prediction and classification methods, and using computer software to build and analyze health decision analysis models. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 429H	Artificial Intelligence Applications in Healthcare Management	1.5 Unit	Artificial intelligence (AI) is a set of methods and algorithms that enable computers to mimic human behavior. Deep learning is a subfield of machine learning that builds large neural networks to extract subtle patterns from data and is currently the state-of-the-art method of achieving artificial intelligence. Healthcare is undoubtedly one of the most promising and influential application areas of AI. The unprecedented increase in data availability and computer power over the past decade has enabled neural network models to parse massive clinical datasets, learn incredibly subtle patterns, and in some cases, augment clinicians' performance. This course covers the basic concepts and theoretical foundations of deep learning as they relate to healthcare management. We will discuss several successful applications of AI in healthcare as well as opportunities for AI across a variety of healthcare contexts. Limitations, challenges, key debates, and considerations surrounding AI models and their adoption in healthcare will also be highlighted. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 430H	Lean Operations in Healthcare	1.5 Unit	The course will include the following topics:  1) Service Process Blueprints, 2) Managing Capacity in Service Systems, 3) Mapping the Value Stream (current and future state), and 4) Inventory Management in Service Systems. The topics considered are viewed in the context of healthcare management, financial services, insurance firms, call centers, back-office operations, and other applications. Through these topics, the participants will be trained in tools that help them understand customers' expectations and needs and to identify service system characteristics that can meet these needs. We will learn how to identify errors in service and troubleshoot these problems by identifying the root causes of errors. Subsequently, we will discuss how one can modify the product or service design so as to prevent defects from occurring. Finally, we will establish performance metrics that help evaluate the effectiveness of the Lean system in place. These efforts will result to improved quality. This course is not oriented toward specialists in service management. Its goal is to introduce you to the environments and help you appreciate the problems that operations managers are confronted with. Then, we will typically discuss some system specifics and emphasize the principles and issues that play key roles in their management. Prereq: Students enrolled in the online MBA program.
MBAP 499	Introduction to Learning Skills	0 Unit	Whether you are an online student, a student attending classes on campus, or a mix of both this course will equip you with the skills necessary to become a successful graduate student. Throughout this course you will learn more about yourself as a learner, how to apply universal standards for critical thinking to the evaluation of professional literature, and how to effectively balance your competing responsibilities as you begin your journey toward your degree.
EMAE 160	Mechanical Manufacturing	3 Units	The course is taught in two sections-Graphics and Manufacturing. Manufacturing To introduce manufacturing processes and materials and their relationships to mechanical design engineering.  Course includes hands-on machining and metal fabrication lab.  Also, each lab creates a 'virtual' field trip of a manufacturing facility to be shared with the class. Graphics Development of mechanical engineering drawings in orthographic, sectional, and pictorial views using manual drafting and computer-aided drafting (CAD software), dimensioning, tolerancing geometric dimensioning and tolerancing and assembly drawings will also be covered. All students are paired up to give a Manufacturing Design Presentation demonstrating the course material. The course has two (75) minute lectures and one (110) minute Machining Lab per week.
EMAE 181	Dynamics	3 Units	Elements of classical dynamics: particle kinematics and dynamics, including concepts of force, mass, acceleration, work, energy, impulse, momentum. Kinetics of systems of particles and of rigid bodies, including concepts of mass center, momentum, mass moment of inertia, dynamic equilibrium. Elementary vibrations. Recommended preparation: MATH 122 and PHYS 121 and ENGR 200.
EMAE 250	Computers in Mechanical Engineering	3 Units	Numerical methods including analysis and control of error and its propagation, solutions of systems of linear algebraic equations, solutions of nonlinear algebraic equations, curve fitting, interpolation, and numerical integration and differentiation. Recommended preparation: ENGR 131 and MATH 122.
EMAE 251	Thermodynamics	3 Units	Thermodynamic concepts and definitions, properties of pure substances, work and heat, first and second laws, entropy, power and refrigeration cycles, thermodynamic relations, mixtures and solutions, chemical reactions, phase and chemical equilibrium. Prereq: CHEM 111, PHYS 121 and MATH 122.
EMAE 252	Fluid Mechanics	3 Units	Fluid properties, hydrostatics, fluid dynamics and kinematics, control volume analysis, differential analysis, dimensional analysis and similitude, viscous internal flows, external flows and boundary layers, lift and drag. Prereq: EMAE 251 and MATH 223.
EMAE 260	Design and Manufacturing I	3 Units	This is the second course of a 4-course sequence focusing on "Engineering Design and Manufacturing."  This course develops students' competence and self-confidence as design engineers by exposing the students to design as a creative process and its relationship with modern manufacturing practices.  The outcomes of the course focus on the student's ability to apply their knowledge of mathematics, science, and engineering to design a system, component, or process that meets desired needs within realistic, multi-dimensional constraints, such as: economic, environmental, social, political, ethical, health and safety, manufacturability, and sustainability.  Additionally, students will be given the opportunity to identify, formulate, and solve engineering problems, while applying professional and ethical practices.  Professional communication skills are emphasized and expected during all stages of the design process.  The course has five main areas of emphasis: design as a creative process, decision-based design methodologies, project management, engineering economics, and design for manufacture (CAD/CAM/CAE) using industrial software tools.  The course exposes the student to the integration of engineering design, manufacturing, and management disciplines and includes activities to consider and understand the complex processes associated with controlling and managing product data through all stages of the product life-cycle (PLM).  Topics include: engineering ethics, design as a creative process, design methodologies, project management, engineering economics, product life-cycle management (PLM), CAD/CAE/CAM, and the role of digital manufacturing within the design process.  Design/Rapid Prototyping Studio activities are an integral part of the course, and enable the students to be part of a design and build team working on various project-based tasks. Prereq: EMAE 160.
EMAE 272	Actuators and Drive Trains	3 Units	Graphical, analytical, and computer techniques for analyzing displacements, velocities, and accelerations in mechanisms. Analysis and synthesis of linkages, cams, and gears. Analysis of actuators, including motors, linear actuators, solenoids, hydraulics, pneumatics,and piezoelectrics.  Laboratory projects include analysis, design, construction, and evaluation of students' devices that include both actuators and transmission mechanisms. Prereq: EMAE 181 and EMAE 250.
EMAE 285	Mechanical Engineering Measurements Laboratory	4 Units	Techniques and devices used for experimental work in mechanical and aerospace engineering.  Lecture topics include elementary statistics, linear regression, propagation of uncertainty, digital data acquisition, characteristics of common measurement systems, background for measurement laboratories, and elements of report writing.  Hands-on laboratory experiences may include measurements in solid mechanics, dynamics, and fluid and thermal sciences, which are summarized in group reports.  At least one report will focus on design of a measurement.  Recommended preparation: EMAE 181, ENGR 225 and ECIV 310.
EMAE 290	Computer-Aided Manufacturing	3 Units	An advanced design and manufacturing engineering course covering a wide range of topics associated with the 'design for manufacturability' concept.  Students will be introduced to a number of advanced solid modeling assignments (CAD), rapid prototyping (RP), and computer-aided manufacturing (CAM).  In addition students will be introduced to computer numerical control (CNC) manual part-programming for CNC milling and turning machine tools.  All students will be given a design project requiring all detail and assembly drawings for a fully engineered design.  The course has two (50) minute lectures and one (110) minute CAD/CAM Lab per week. Prereq: EMAE 160.
EMAE 307	Fundamentals of Biomechanics	3 Units	Fundamentals of biomechanics will teach students how to apply basic principles of mechanics to understand, explain and model biological processes at across the relevant length-scales (cell-tissue-organ-organism), and over a broad range of physiological systems (respiratory, ocular, circulatory, and musculoskeletal). Physiology of organs and tissues that are involved in biomechanical functions will also be covered. Offered as EMAE 307 and EBME 317. Prereq: ENGR 200.
EMAE 350	Mechanical Engineering Analysis	3 Units	Methods of problem formulation and application of frequently used mathematical methods in mechanical engineering. Modeling of discrete and continuous systems, solutions of single and multi-degree of freedom problems, boundary value problems, transform techniques, approximation techniques. Recommended preparation: MATH 224.
EMAE 351	Control of Mechanical Systems	3 Units	An introduction to automatic control theory with emphasis on mechanical and electromechanical systems. Review of Laplace Transforms, mathematical modeling of mechanical systems, state variable models, feedback control characteristics and performance, stability analysis; root locus techniques; Bode plots and Nyquist diagrams for stability analysis in frequency domain; transient and steady-state response and design of closed loop control systems. Prereq: EMAE 181, EMAE 252, EMAE 350, and ENGR 210.
EMAE 353	Heat Transfer	3 Units	Steady-state and transient conduction, principles of convection, empirical relations for forced convection, natural convection, boiling and condensation, radiation heat transfer, heat exchangers, mass transfer. Prereq: EMAE 251 and EMAE 252.
EMAE 355	Design of Fluid and Thermal Elements	3 Units	Synthesis of fluid mechanics, thermodynamics, and heat transfer. Practical design problems originating from industrial experience. Recommended preparation: EMAE 251, EMAE 252, and EMAE 353.
EMAE 356	Aerospace Design	3 Units	Interactive and interdisciplinary activities in areas of fluid mechanics, heat transfer, solid mechanics, thermodynamics, and systems analysis approach in design of aerospace vehicles. Projects involve developing (or improving) design of aerospace vehicles of current interest (aircraft and spacecraft) starting from mission requirements to researching developments in relevant areas and using them to obtain conceptual design. Prereq: EMAE 160, EMAE 355, EMAE 376, EMAE 383, EMAE 384 and Senior standing. Coreq: EMAE 382.
EMAE 359	Aero/Gas Dynamics	3 Units	Review of conservation equations. Potential flow. Subsonic airfoil. Finite wing. Isentropic one-dimensional flow. Normal and oblique shock waves. Prandtl-Meyer expansion wave. Supersonic airfoil theory. Prereq: EMAE 252.
EMAE 360	Design and Manufacturing II	3 Units	This is the third course of a 4-course sequence focusing on "Engineering Design and Manufacturing," and is the senior capstone design course focused on a semester-long design/build/evaluate project.  The course draws on a student's past and present academic and industrial experiences and exposes them to the design and manufacture of a product or device that solves an open-ended "real world" problem with multidimensional constraints.  The course is structured and time-tabled within the Case School of Engineering (CSE) to give the EMAE 360 students the opportunity to team with students from other CSE departments to form multidisciplinary design teams to work on the solution to a common problem.  The outcomes of the course continue to focus on the student's ability to function on multidisciplinary teams while applying their knowledge of mathematics, science and engineering to design a system, component, or process that meets desired needs within realistic, multidimensional constraints, such as: economic, environmental, social, political, ethical, health and safety, manufacturability, and sustainability.  Professional communication skills are emphasized and expected during all stages of the design process and will include formal and informal oral presentations, periodic peer-focused design reviews, and a development through its various evolutionary stages to completion. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: EMAE 160 and EMAE 260.
EMAE 370	Design of Mechanical Elements	3 Units	Application of mechanics and mechanics of solids in machine design situations. Design of production machinery and consumer products considering fatigue and mechanical behavior. Selection and sizing of basic mechanical components: fasteners, springs, bearings, gears, fluid power elements. Prereq: ECIV 310 and ENGR 200.
EMAE 371	Computational Fluid Dynamics	3 Units	Finite difference, finite element, and spectral techniques for numerical solutions of partial differential equations. Explicit and implicit methods for elliptic, parabolic, hyperbolic, and mixed equations. Unsteady incompressible flow equations in primitive and vorticity/stream function formulations.  Steady and unsteady transport (passive scalar) equations. Offered as EMAE 371 and EMAE 471.
EMAE 372	Structural Materials by Design	4 Units	Materials selection and design of mechanical and structural elements with respect to static failure, elastic stability, residual stresses, stress concentrations, impact, fatigue, creep, and environmental conditions. Mechanical behavior of engineering materials (metals, polymers, ceramics, composites). Influence of ultrastructural and microstructural aspects of materials on mechanical properties. Mechanical test methods covered. Models of deformation behavior of isotropic and anisotropic materials. Methods to analyze static and fatigue fracture properties. Rational approaches to materials selection for new and existing designs of structures. Failure analysis methods and examples, and the professional ethical responsibility of the engineer. Four mandatory laboratories, with reports. Offered as EMAE 372 and EMSE 372. Prereq or Coreq: ENGR 200.
EMAE 373	Dynamics of Machinery	3 Units	Dynamics of interacting machine component, comprehensive understanding of system dynamic behavior. Kinetics of 3-dimensionl rigid bodies. Mathematical formulations of multi-degree-of-freedom mechanisms. Balancing of reciprocating and rotating machinery. Fluid-film and rolling contact bearings. Time-dependent gear mesh stiffness. Prereq:  EMAE 181 and EMAE 272 and EMAE 370.
EMAE 376	Aerostructures	3 Units	Mechanics of thin-walled aerospace structures. Load analysis. Shear flow due to shear and twisting loads in open and closed cross-sections. Thin-walled pressure vessels. Virtual work and energy principles. Introduction to structural vibrations and finite element methods. Recommended preparation: ECIV 310.
EMAE 377	Biorobotics Team Research	3 Units	Many exciting research opportunities cross disciplinary lines. To participate in such projects, researchers must operate in multi-disciplinary teams. The Biorobotics Team Research course offers a unique capstone opportunity for undergraduate students to utilize skills they developed during their undergraduate experience while acquiring new teaming skills. A group of eight students form a research team under the direction of two faculty leaders. Team members are chosen from appropriate majors through interviews with the faculty. They will research a biological mechanism or principle and develop a robotic device that captures the actions of that mechanism. Although each student will cooperate on the team, they each have a specific role, and must develop a final paper that describes the research generated on their aspect of the project. Students meet for one class period per week and two 2-hour lab periods. Initially students brainstorm ideas and identify the project to be pursued. They then acquire biological data and generate robotic designs. Both are further developed during team meetings and reports. Final oral reports and a demonstration of the robotic device occur in week 15. Offered as BIOL 377, EMAE 377, BIOL 467, and EMAE 477. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
EMAE 379	Mechanics and Control of Compliant Robotics	3 Units	Robots are fundamentally mechanical devices designed to function autonomously or semi-autonomously.  In autonomous systems including animals and robots, one of the most important mechanical properties is stiffness.  Selective compliance allows robots to grasp a wide range of objects and traverse rougher terrain. A new field of Soft Robotics aims to create robots that are robust, cheap, and safe in close proximity to humans. However, as engineers challenge themselves to make increasingly soft robots, new challenges in design and control need to be addressed. This course will provide an introduction to state of the art in robotics as cyber-physical systems from a fundamental mechanics perspective.  Topics include: grasping, wearable assistive locomotion, legged locomotion, locomotion in fluids, and locomotion over soft terrain. Offered as EMAE 379 and EMAE 479. Prereq: (ENGR 131 or CSDS 132 or ECSE 132) and EMAE 181 and ECSE 304.
EMAE 382	Propulsion	3 Units	Energy sources of propulsion.  Performance criteria.  Review of one-dimensional gas dynamics.  Airbreathing engine cycle analysis and turbomachinery.  Introduction of thermochemistry and combustion.  Rocket flight performance and rocket staging.  Chemical liquid and solid rockets. Offered as EMAE 382 and EMAE 482. Prereq: EMAE 251 and EMAE 359.
EMAE 383	Flight Mechanics	3 Units	Aircraft performance: take-off and landing, unaccelerated flight, range and endurance, flight trajectories. Aerodynamics and propulsion. Aircraft static stability and control, simple maneuvers. Aircraft flight dynamics and control, flight simulation. Offered as EMAE 383 and EMAE 483. Prereq: EMAE 181 and EMAE 252 and EMAE 359 and ECSE 304.
EMAE 384	Orbital Dynamics	3 Units	Spacecraft orbital mechanics: the solar system, elements of celestial mechanics, orbit transfer under impulsive thrust, continuous thrust, orbit transfer, decay of orbits due to drag, elements of lift-off and re-entry. Rigid body dynamics, altitude dynamics and control, simulations. Prereq: EMAE 181 and EMAE 252 and EMAE 359 and ECSE 304.
EMAE 387	Vibration Problems in Engineering	4 Units	Free and forced vibration problems in single and multi-degree of freedom damped and undamped linear systems. Vibration isolation and absorbers. Modal analysis and approximate solutions. Introduction to vibration of continuous media. Noise problems. Laboratory projects to illustrate theoretical concepts and applications. Recommended preparation: MATH 224 and EMAE 181.
EMAE 390	Advanced Manufacturing Technology	3 Units	This course will focus on advanced manufacturing technologies and processes, with an emphasis on the fundamental understanding of the material behaviors and process in the manufacturing operations.  Topics will include: materials in manufacturing, glass manufacturing, polymer composite manufacturing, metal casting, metal machining, metal forming, grinding, welding, heat treatment, and quality control.  The course will be lecture-based, with lab-based class project in the machine shop and think[box] studios. Prereq: EMAE 290.
EMAE 396	Special Topics in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
EMAE 397	Independent Laboratory Research	1 - 3 Units	Independent research in a laboratory.
EMAE 398	Senior Project	3 Units	Individual or team design or experimental project under faculty supervisor. Requirements include periodic reporting of progress, plus a final oral presentation and written report. Recommended preparation: Senior standing, EMAE 360, and consent of instructor. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
EMAE 399	Advanced Independent Laboratory Research/Design	1 - 3 Units	Students perform advanced independent research or an extended design project under the direct mentorship of the instructor.  Typically performed as an extension to EMAE 397 or EMAE 398. Prereq: EMAE 397.
EMAE 400T	Graduate Teaching I	0 Unit	This course will engage the Ph.D. candidate in a variety of teaching experiences that will include direct contact (for example, teaching recitations and laboratories, guest lectures, office hours) as well non-contact preparation (exams, quizzes, demonstrations) and grading activities.  The teaching experiences will be conducted under the supervision of the faculty member(s) responsible for coordinating student teaching activities.  All Ph.D. candidates enrolled in this course sequence will be expected to perform direct contact teaching at some point in the sequence. Recommended preparation: Ph.D. student in Mechanical Engineering.
EMAE 401	Mechanics of Continuous Media	3 Units	Vector and tensor calculus. Stress and traction, finite strain and deformation tensors. Kinematics of continuous media, general conservation and balance laws. Material symmetry groups and observer transformation. Constitutive relations with applications to solid and fluid mechanics problems.
EMAE 414	Nanobiomechanics in Biology	3 Units	This course will elucidate the forces at play at the level of proteins including those associated with mass, stiffness, viscosity, thermal and chemical factors.  Basic polymer mechanics within the context of biological molecules will be covered and structures of key proteins associated with mechanical functions, such as actin, myosin and the cell membrane will be explained.  Generation of force by polymerization of filamentous proteins as well as motor proteins will be included.  Interaction forces between proteins, DNA/RNA mechanics will also be elucidated.  Besides lectures, there will be term long project assignments (outreach-based or detailed literature survey on a subject associated with nanomechanics of cells/proteins). Recommended Preparation: Mechanics of Materials, Thermodynamics, Statics, Introductory Level Differential Equations, Introductory Level Fluid Mechanics.
EMAE 415	Introduction to Musculo-skeletal Biomechanics	3 Units	Structural behavior of the musculo-skeletal system. Function of joints, joint loading, and lubrication. Stress-strain properties of bone and connective tissue. Analysis of fracture and repair mechanisms. Viscoplastic modeling of skeletal membranes. Recommended preparation: EMAE 181 and ECIV 310.
EMAE 450	Advanced Mechanical Engineering Analysis	3 Units	This course is intended to equip students with tools for solving mathematical problems commonly encountered in mechanical, fluid and thermal systems.  Specific goals are to: i)   Enable the student to properly categorize the problem in a variety of ways ii)  Enable the student to identify appropriate approaches to solving the problem ii)  Provide the student experience in applying some common methods for obtaining numerical solutions iii) Provide the student with understanding of trade-offs and expectations for the methods used.   The course covers topics related to analytical and computational approaches to problems categorized in a variety of ways including: 1.  Linear versus nonlinear problems 2) finite degrees of freedom v. infinite degrees of freedom, 3) equilibrium v. propagation v. eigenvalue problems,  4) direct formulations v. indirect formulations  5) analytical v. numerical solutions.   The course will be built around specific examples from solid mechanics, dynamics, vibrations, heat transfer and fluid mechanics.  The significance of the various categorizations will be developed as an ongoing part of the approach to solving the problems. Prereq: EMAE 350 or Requisites Not Met permission.
EMAE 453	Advanced Fluid Dynamics I	3 Units	Derivation and discussion of the general equations for conservation of mass, momentum, and energy using tensors. Several exact solutions of the incompressible Newtonian viscous equations. Kinematics and dynamics of inviscid, incompressible flow including free streamline theory developed using vector, complex variable, and numerical techniques.
EMAE 454	Advanced Fluid Dynamics II	3 Units	Continuation of EMAE 453. Low Reynolds number approximations. Matching techniques: inner and outer expressions. High Reynolds number approximations: boundary layer theory. Elements of gas dynamics: quasi one-dimensional flow, shock waves, supersonic expansion, potential equation, linearized theory, and similarity rules. Recommended preparation: EMAE 453.
EMAE 455	Advanced Thermodynamics	3 Units	Basic ideas of thermodynamics and dominant methods of their development: operational, postulational, and statistical. Entropy and information theory. Irreversible thermodynamics. Applications.
EMAE 456	Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems in Biology and Medicine (BioMEMS)	3 Units	Microscale technologies have enabled advanced capabilities for researchers in unexplored territories of cells in biology and medicine.  Biological (or Biomedical) Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) and Biomanufacturing involve the fundamentals of mechanics, electronics and advanced microfabrication technologies with specific emphasis on biological applications.  MEMS is an interdisciplinary research area which brings together multiple disciplines including, mechanical engineering, biomedical engineering, chemical engineering, materials science, electrical engineering, clinical sciences, medicine, and biology.  MEMS based technologies have found real world applications in tissue engineering, implantable microdevices, proteomics, genomics, molecular biology, and point-of-care platforms.  This course aims to: (1) introduce the need for miniaturized systems in biology and medicine and the fundamental design and microfabrication concepts, (2) introduce the basics of microscale manipulation of cells, biological agents, and biomanufacturing, employing the fundamentals of microscale behaviors of fluids and mechanical systems, (3) expose the students to applications of MEMS and on-chip technologies in biology and medicine.
EMAE 457	Combustion	3 Units	Chemical kinetics and thermodynamics; governing conservation equations for chemically reacting flows; laminar premixed and diffusion flames; turbulent flames; ignition; extinction and flame stabilization; detonation; liquid droplet and solid particle combustion; flame spread, combustion-generated air pollution; applications of combustion processes to engines, rockets, and fire research.
EMAE 459	Advanced Heat Transfer	3 Units	Analysis of engineering heat transfer from first principles including conduction, convection, radiation, and combined heat and mass transfer. Examples of significance and role of analytic solutions, approximate methods (including integral methods) and numerical methods in the solution of heat transfer problems. Recommended preparation: EMAE 453.
EMAE 460	Theory and Design of Fluid Power Machinery	3 Units	Fluid mechanic and thermodynamic aspects of the design of fluid power machinery such as axial and radial flow turbomachinery, positive displacement devices and their component characterizations. Recommended preparation: Consent of instructor.
EMAE 461	Chemistry of Fire Safe Polymers and Composites	3 Units	Chemistry of Fire Safe Polymers and Composites starts with the introduction of characterization techniques used for fire safe materials and combustion phenomena research.  General discussion on how reduced flammability of polymers and composites are obtained, for example by additives and preparing intrinsically thermally stable chemical structure and some examples of smart approaches, will be discussed.  It also discusses the synthetic methods of preparing high temperature stable polymers in addition to the raw materials used to prepare those materials.  Special emphasis will be placed on the thermal stability data obtained by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and combustion calorimetry for those fire safe materials.  Mechanistic aspects of the flammability of polymers will be explained with special emphasis on the molar contribution of chemical functionality to the heat release capacity.  Theoretical derivation of thermokinetic parameters will be explained.  In addition, a common sense build-up will be attempted by providing actual numbers associated with those thermokinetic parameters.  Upon completion of background formation, a more advanced materials, composites and nanocomposites, will be discussed using the results recently reported.  Preliminary attempts to explain flame retardation by nanocomposite structures will also be discussed. Offered as EMAC 461 and EMAE 461.
EMAE 463	Fire Dynamics	3 Units	This course introduces compartment fires and burning behavior of materials. Topics include: buoyant driven flow, fire plume, ceiling jet, vent flow, flashover and smoke movement as well as steady burning of liquids and solids; ignition, extinction and flame spread over solids. Recommended Preparation: Elementary knowledge in thermo-fluids is required. Offered as EMAE 463 and EMAC 463. Prereq: EMAE 325 or Requisites Not Met permission.
EMAE 464	Fire Protection Engineering	3 Units	This course introduces essentials of fire protection in industry and houses. Topics include: hazard identification (release of flammable gases and their dispersion), fire and explosion hazards, prevention and risk mitigation, fire detection systems, mechanisms of fire extinguishment, evaluation of fire extinguishing agents and systems. Offered as EMAC 464 and EMAE 464.
EMAE 471	Computational Fluid Dynamics	3 Units	Finite difference, finite element, and spectral techniques for numerical solutions of partial differential equations. Explicit and implicit methods for elliptic, parabolic, hyperbolic, and mixed equations. Unsteady incompressible flow equations in primitive and vorticity/stream function formulations.  Steady and unsteady transport (passive scalar) equations. Offered as EMAE 371 and EMAE 471.
EMAE 475	Finite Element Analysis	3 Units	Formulation of the finite element methods for linear analysis of solid structures are presented. Solutions of equilibrium equations in static and dynamic analyses are developed. Finite element methods via computer programing are implemented to obtain solutions to pertinent engineering problems. Recommended preparation: EMAE 401.
EMAE 477	Biorobotics Team Research	3 Units	Many exciting research opportunities cross disciplinary lines. To participate in such projects, researchers must operate in multi-disciplinary teams. The Biorobotics Team Research course offers a unique capstone opportunity for undergraduate students to utilize skills they developed during their undergraduate experience while acquiring new teaming skills. A group of eight students form a research team under the direction of two faculty leaders. Team members are chosen from appropriate majors through interviews with the faculty. They will research a biological mechanism or principle and develop a robotic device that captures the actions of that mechanism. Although each student will cooperate on the team, they each have a specific role, and must develop a final paper that describes the research generated on their aspect of the project. Students meet for one class period per week and two 2-hour lab periods. Initially students brainstorm ideas and identify the project to be pursued. They then acquire biological data and generate robotic designs. Both are further developed during team meetings and reports. Final oral reports and a demonstration of the robotic device occur in week 15. Offered as BIOL 377, EMAE 377, BIOL 467, and EMAE 477. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
EMAE 479	Mechanics and Control of Compliant Robotics	3 Units	Robots are fundamentally mechanical devices designed to function autonomously or semi-autonomously.  In autonomous systems including animals and robots, one of the most important mechanical properties is stiffness.  Selective compliance allows robots to grasp a wide range of objects and traverse rougher terrain. A new field of Soft Robotics aims to create robots that are robust, cheap, and safe in close proximity to humans. However, as engineers challenge themselves to make increasingly soft robots, new challenges in design and control need to be addressed. This course will provide an introduction to state of the art in robotics as cyber-physical systems from a fundamental mechanics perspective.  Topics include: grasping, wearable assistive locomotion, legged locomotion, locomotion in fluids, and locomotion over soft terrain. Offered as EMAE 379 and EMAE 479.
EMAE 480	Fatigue of Materials	3 Units	Fundamental and applied aspects of metals, polymers and ceramics. Behavior of materials in stress and strain cycling, methods of computing cyclic stress and strain, cumulative fatigue damage under complex loading. Application of linear elastic fracture mechanics to fatigue crack propagation. Mechanisms of fatigue crack initiation and propagation. Case histories and practical approaches to mitigate fatigue and prolong life.
EMAE 481	Advanced Dynamics I	3 Units	Particle and rigid-body kinematics and dynamics. Inertia tensor, coordinate transformations and rotating reference frames. Application to rotors and gyroscopes. Theory of orbital motion with application to earth satellites. Impact dynamics. Lagrange equations with applications to multi-degree of freedom systems. Theory of small vibrations. Recommended preparation: EMAE 181.
EMAE 482	Propulsion	3 Units	Energy sources of propulsion.  Performance criteria.  Review of one-dimensional gas dynamics.  Airbreathing engine cycle analysis and turbomachinery.  Introduction of thermochemistry and combustion.  Rocket flight performance and rocket staging.  Chemical liquid and solid rockets. Offered as EMAE 382 and EMAE 482.
EMAE 483	Flight Mechanics	3 Units	Aircraft performance: take-off and landing, unaccelerated flight, range and endurance, flight trajectories. Aerodynamics and propulsion. Aircraft static stability and control, simple maneuvers. Aircraft flight dynamics and control, flight simulation. Offered as EMAE 383 and EMAE 483.
EMAE 487	Vibration Problems in Engineering	3 Units	Free and forced-vibration problems in single and multi-degree of freedom damped and undamped linear systems. Vibration isolation and absorbers. Modal analysis and approximate solutions. Introduction to vibration of continuous media. Noise problems. Laboratory projects to illustrate theoretical concepts and applications. Recommended preparation: EMAE 181 and MATH 224.
EMAE 488	Advanced Robotics	3 Units	This course will focus on up-to-date knowledge and theories related to robotics and multi-agent systems.  Related mathematics and theories including group theory (Lie groups), rigid-body motions (SO(3) and SE(3)), kinematics, dynamics, and control will be studied.  In addition, the class will also discuss structural, computational and task complexity in robotic systems based on combinatorial analysis, information theory, and graph theory.  Lecture and discussion topics: Kinematics; Introduction to Group Theory and Lie Groups; Rigid-body Motions (SO(3), SE(3)); Multi-body Dynamical Systems: Order-N computational methods; Complexity Analysis for Robotic Systems; Structural complexity, information-theoretic complexity, and task complexity; Special Discussion Topics; Special discussion topics may vary each year. Students enrolled in this class will be required to conduct a final project.  Two or three students will work as a team.  The topics for student teams may include: computer simulation of multi-body dynamical systems, art robot design, and complexity analysis for coupled complex systems.  The detailed information will be provided in the first week of the class.  The final presentations and demonstrations will be held during the last week of class and will be open to the public audience.  Students are also required to submit a final report following a IEEE conference paper template.
EMAE 489	Robotics I	3 Units	Orientation and configuration coordinate transformations, forward and inverse kinematics and Newton-Euler and Lagrange-Euler dynamic analysis. Planning of manipulator trajectories. Force, position, and hybrid control of robot manipulators. Analytical techniques applied to select industrial robots. Recommended preparation: EMAE 181. Offered as CSDS 489, ECSE 489 and EMAE 489.
EMAE 494	Energy Systems	3 Units	The overarching goal of this course is to introduce energy systems to graduate students, allowing the class to explore energy resource options and technologies. We will evaluate (from a scientific, mathematical and societal perspective) the trade-offs and uncertainties of various energy systems and explores a framework for assessing solutions. Topics will include resource estimation, environmental effects and economic evaluations of fossil fuels, nuclear power, hydropower, solar energy and more. Prereq: Junior or Senior Undergraduate Engineering major or Graduate Engineering major.
EMAE 500T	Graduate Teaching II	0 Unit	This course will engage the Ph.D. candidate in a variety of teaching experiences that will include direct contact (for example, teaching, recitations and laboratories, guest lectures, office hours) as well non-contact preparation (exams, quizzes, demonstration) and grading activities.  The teaching experience will be conducted under the supervision of the faculty member(s) responsible for coordinating student teaching activities.  All Ph.D. candidates enrolled in this course sequence will be expected to perform direct contact teaching at some point in the sequence. Recommended preparation: Ph.D. student in Mechanical Engineering.
EMAE 540	Advanced Dynamics II	3 Units	Using variational approach, comprehensive development of principle of virtual work, Hamilton's principle and Lagrange equations for holonomic and non-holonomic systems. Hamilton's equations of motion, canonical transformations, Hamilton-Jacobi theory and special theory of relativity in classical mechanics. Modern dynamic system formulations.
EMAE 554	Turbulent Fluid Motion	3 Units	Mathematics and physics of turbulence. Statistical (isotropic, homogeneous turbulence) theories; success and limitations. Experimental and observational (films) evidence. Macrostructures and microturbulence. Other theoretical approaches. Recommended preparation: EMAE 454.
EMAE 557	Convective Two-Phase Flow and Heat Transfer	3 Units	Basic two-phase flow equations, homogeneous model, drift-flux model, flow regimes, pressure drop in two-phase flow. Nucleation and bubble dynamics, pool boiling, subcooled boiling, forced convection boiling, critical heat flux in pool boiling, critical heat flux in forced convection boiling, minimum heat flux, film boiling, post dryout heat transfer. Flow instabilities, choking in two-phase flow, film and dropwise condensation. Applications to heat exchangers. Special boiling and two-phase flow problems.
EMAE 558	Conduction and Radiation	3 Units	Fundamental law, initial and boundary conditions, basic equations for isotropic and anisotropic media, related physical problems, steady and transient temperature distributions in solid structures. Analytical, graphical, numerical, and experimental methods for constant and variable material properties. Recommended preparation: Consent of instructor.
EMAE 560	Sustainable Manufacturing	3 Units	This course focuses on sustainable manufacturing principles and analysis methods including material flow analysis, energy flow analysis, life cycle assessment, and Taguchi method, etc.,  and covers a comprehensive list of manufacturing processes from conventional manufacturing such as metal casting and machining, to emerging manufacturing techniques like additive manufacturing and nano-manufacturing on their sustainable manufacturing operations and practices. Some of the important goals of this course are: a	Students learn to understand the fundamental methods and techniques of sustainable manufacturing.  b	Students learn the theory and practices on sustainable manufacturing through sustainability analysis and improvement of industrial manufacturing processes. c	Students learn state-of-the-art knowledge on environmental impact assessment methods. d	Students apply the learned knowledge and skills in class discussions and project implementation. Prereq: Graduate student standing.
EMAE 600T	Graduate Teaching III	0 Unit	This course will engage the Ph.D. candidate in a variety of teaching experiences that will include direct (for example, teaching recitations and laboratories, guest lectures, office hours) as well non-contact preparation (exams, quizzes, demonstrations) and grading activities.  The teaching experience will be conducted under the supervision of the faculty member(s) responsible for coordinating student teaching activities.  All Ph.D. candidates enrolled in this course sequence will be expected to perform direct contact teaching at some point in the sequence. Recommended preparation: Ph.D. student in Mechanical Engineering.
EMAE 601	Independent Study	1 - 18 Units	
EMAE 649	Project M.S.	1 - 6 Units	
EMAE 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
EMAE 689	Special Topics	1 - 18 Units	
EMAE 695	Project M.S.	1 - 9 Units	Research course taken by Plan B M.S. students. Prereq: Enrolled in the EMAE Plan B MS Program.
EMAE 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
MSTP 400	Research Rotation in Medical Scientist Training Program	0 - 9 Units	All students must complete research rotations in a minimum of three different MSTP-approved laboratories and submit rotation reports and rotation evaluations for each to the MSTP office.  All three of the rotations must be completed before the beginning of each student's third year of the program. The main purpose of research rotations is to aid the student in selecting a laboratory for their thesis work.
MSTP 401	Introduction to MSTP	0 Unit	Focus and Scope of Course:  The course examines the unique challenges that MSTP students face as they navigate a dual degree program. The course will explore strategies that successful MSTP students employ, including mentor choice, time management, strategy and networking. The course will also offer exposure to the various resources available at CWRU for medical and graduate students. Lastly, through journal clubs and formal lecturing, the critical thinking required of an MSTP student will be explored.   Objectives: Students will be able to -Employ successful strategies for research rotation set-up and mentor choice  -Enunciate strategies for the reconciliation of dual career training with an emphasis on networking, granting and timing -Employ the critical thinking required for manuscript critique and employ successful strategies in both oral and written presentation.  Required Texts:	None, however, manuscripts may be assigned and will be provided in pdf format.  Format and Expectations: 	As the class is meant to be in dialogue format, meaningful class participation is expected and required. An individual cannot participate if he or she is absent, therefore, attendance is required. If there is a conflict with a required medical school assignment or activity, the medical school activity takes precedence, and attendance in the MSTP course will be waived for that session. Individual students will at times be assigned responsibility for leading the discussion relevant to specified readings. It is expected that all students will complete the readings and assignments prior to the start of the class at which the reading was assigned.  Grading:	Grading will be Pass/Fail. If students are present at all sessions (excepting when required for an alternative activity at the medical school and excepting excused absences with permission from the instructor), and if the student makes an attempt at a meaningful contribution to the discussion, it is anticipated that all students will pass.
MLSC 101	Leadership and Personal Development	1 Unit	This course establishes a framework for understanding officership, leadership, and Army values.  Also addresses personal development skills, including physical fitness and time management.  Note:  Enrollment in this course by a non-contracted student does not obligate the student to the military or the Army ROTC program.
MLSC 102	Introduction to Tactical Leadership	1 Unit	This course focuses on communications, leadership, and problem solving.  Introduces students to the duties and responsibilities of an Army lieutenant as well as examining current pay and benefits.  Note:  Enrollment in this course by a non-contracted student does not obligate the student to the military or the Army ROTC program.  Recommended preparation:  MLSC 101.
MLSC 201	Innovative Team Leadership	2 Units	Use of ethics-based leadership skills to develop individual abilities and contribute to effective team-building.  Focus on skills in oral presentations, writing concisely, planning of events, coordination of group efforts, advanced first aid, land navigation, and basic military tactics.  Learn the fundamentals of ROTC's Leadership Development Program.  Participation in a weekend field training exercise is optional but encouraged.  Note:  Enrollment in this course by a non-contracted student does not obligate the student to the military or the Army ROTC program.  Recommended preparation:  MLSC 101, 102.
MLSC 202	Foundations of Tactical Leadership	2 Units	Introduction to individual and team aspects of military tactics in small-unit operations.  Includes use of radio communications, making safety assessments, movement techniques, planning for team safety/security, and methods of pre-execution checks.  Practical exercises with upper-division ROTC students.  Techniques for training others as an aspect of continued leadership development.  Participation in a weekend exercise is optional but encouraged.  Note:  Enrollment in this course by a non-contracted student does not obligate the student to the military or the Army ROTC program.  Recommended preparation:  MLSC 101, 102, 201.
MLIT 327	Gesture in Cognition and Communication	3 Units	Most people never notice that when they are talking, they're also gesturing. Why do we produce these gestures? What can studying them tell us about the human mind? This course surveys scientific research on gesture, exploring topics such as the role of gesture in communication, cross-cultural differences in gesture, and the relationship between gesture and signed languages. The course will focus on gestures produced with speech, but will cover symbolic and ritualized gesture in the visual arts and in dance. Offered as COGS 327, COGS 427 and MLIT 327. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
MBIO 399	Undergraduate Research	1 - 3 Units	Permits qualified undergraduates to work in a faculty member's laboratory.
MBIO 420	Current Topics in Cancer	3 Units	The concept of cancer hallmarks has provided a useful guiding principle in our understanding of the complexity of cancer. The hallmarks include sustaining proliferative signaling, evading growth suppressors, enabling replicative immortality, activating invasion and metastasis, inducing angiogenesis, resisting cell death, deregulating cellular energetics, avoiding immune destruction, tumor-promoting inflammation, and genome instability and mutation. The objectives of this course are to (1) examine the principles of some of these hallmarks, and (2) explore potential therapies developed based on these hallmarks of cancer. This is a student-driven and discussion-based graduate course. Students should have had some background on the related subjects and have read scientific papers in their prior coursework. Students will be called on to present and discuss experimental design, data and conclusions from assigned publications. There will be no exams or comprehensive papers but students will submit a one-page critique (strengths and weaknesses) of one of the assigned papers prior to each class meeting. The course will end with a full-day student-run symposium on topics to be decided jointly by students and the course director. Grades will be based on class participation, written critiques, and symposium presentations. Offered as BIOC 420, MBIO 420, PATH 422, and PHRM 420. Prereq: IBMS 453 and IBMS 455.
MBIO 435	Seminar in Molecular Biology/Microbiology	1 Unit	Graduate students will attend the departmental seminar given by all graduate students in the Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, in the Molecular Virology Program, and in the Cell Biology Program, as well as give a seminar on their own thesis research.  Students will be evaluated by the faculty member in charge of that student's seminar with input from the students' own thesis committee.  After each seminar, the student presenter will meet with other graduate students for peer-review of the content, delivery, and style of the seminar.  Peer reviewers will also be evaluated for the quality of their input. Offered as CLBY 435 and MBIO 435 and MVIR 435. Prereq: CBIO 453 and CBIO 455.
MBIO 445	Molecular Biology and Pathogenesis of RNA and DNA Viruses	3 Units	Through a combination of lectures by Case faculty and guest lecturers, along with student discussion of current literature, this course emphasizes mechanisms of viral gene expression and pathogenesis.  RNA viruses to be discussed include positive, negative, and retroviruses.  DNA viruses include SV40, adenovirus, herpes, papilloma, and others.  Important aspects of host defense mechanisms, antiviral agents, and viral vectors will also be covered.  Students will be evaluated based on their quality of presentation of course papers assigned to them and their overall participation in class discussions. Offered as MBIO 445 and MVIR 445.
MBIO 450	Cells and Pathogens	3 Units	Modern molecular cell biology owes a great debt to viral and bacterial pathogens as model systems.  In some instances pathogens operate by faithful mimicry of host proteins, and other cases represent the result of extensive molecular tinkering and convergent evolution.  This course will also explore numerous mechanisms utilized by pathogens to subvert the host and enhance their own survival.  Topics covered include nuclear regulatory mechanisms, protein synthesis and stability, membrane-bound organelles, endocytosis and phagocytosis, and factors that influence cell behavior such as cytoskeleton rearrangements, cell-cell interactions, and cell migration.  Additional topics include cell signaling and co-evolution of pathogens and host cell functions.  Students are expected to come to class prepared to discuss pre-assigned readings consisting of brief reviews and seminal papers from the literature.  Student assessment will be based on effective class participation (approximately 80%) and successful presentation of an independent research topic (approximately 20%). Offered as CLBY 450, MBIO 450, and MVIR 450. Prereq: CBIO 453 and CBIO 455 or permission of instructor.
MBIO 488	Yeast Genetics and Cell Biology	3 Units	This seminar course provides an introduction to the genetics and molecular biology of the yeasts S. cerevisiae and S. pombe by a discussion of current literature focusing primarily on topics in yeast cell biology. Students are first introduced to the tools of molecular genetics and special features of yeasts that make them important model eukaryotic organisms. Some selected topics include cell polarity, cell cycle, secretory pathways, vesicular and nuclear/cytoplasmic transport, mitochondrial import and biogenesis, chromosome segregation, cytoskeleton, mating response and signal transduction.  Offered as CLBY 488, GENE 488, MBIO 488, and PATH 488.
MBIO 513	Bacterial Virulence and Host Interactions	3 Units	The goal of this seminar course is to familiarize students with bacterial virulence mechanisms and how they interact with the host.  The focus will be on current literature pertaining to this field.  While the molecular basis of bacterial virulence mechanisms will be the main focus, some time will be spent on the host immune response.  Topics covered will include adhesins/pili, secretion mechanisms, AB toxins, bacterial invasion and intracellular survival, regulation of virulence gene expression. Prereq: CBIO 453 and CBIO 455 or equivalent courses.
MBIO 526	Cell Biology and Human Disease	3 Units	This course is designed to provide broad base of knowledge regarding cell structure and function.  The basic structure of the cell will be discussed, as will the various functional systems that are superimposed upon and interact with this structure.  The course will discuss organelle biogenesis, materials movement inside cells, cell interaction with the external environment, cell cycle and cell death regulation, cytoskeleton dynamics, quality control mechanisms, and basic signal transduction concepts.  The course will also discuss how abnormal cell function may lead to human disease, and how basic cell function may be harnessed by intracellular pathogens to provide favorable intracellular environments for replication.  The major goals of this course are to provide students with a working knowledge of the cell to facilitate understanding of the scientific literature, and to familiarize students with modern experimental approaches in cell biology.  The course will rely heavily on student participation.  Students will be provided with study guides with the expectation they will come to class prepared to lead interactive group discussions with minimal input from instructors. Offered as CLBY 526, MBIO 526 and MVIR 526.
MBIO 601	Research in Molecular Biology and Microbiology	1 - 18 Units	
MBIO 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
MMED 400	Research Rotations	0 Unit	Research rotations are conducted to expose the student to several laboratory environments, a variety of research problems and numerous laboratory techniques as well as to assist them in the selection of their Research Advisor.  Rotations will begin immediately upon enrollment and continue through the second semester of the first year.  Usually rotations will last 12 weeks, however if a student decides that he/she is not interested in the assigned laboratory a shorter rotation is appropriate.  The student is responsible for arranging each rotation with an approved trainer with the consultation of the Graduate Program Director.  To assist in this endeavor, the Graduate Program Director will provide a list of approved trainers who have space, time and money to support a graduate student.  During the rotation, students are expected to participate in all lab and departmental activities, e.g., lab meetings and seminars. At the completion of a rotation the student is required to submit a written Rotation Report including an outline of the problem being studied, a description of the experimental approaches, a discussion of the results of performed experiments as well as future directions.
MMED 402	Tools for Research	2 Units	The goal of this course is to provide a thorough and comprehensive review of current laboratory technology essential to research in molecular medicine, focusing on basic underlying principles, important controls and caveats. The students will clone a cytokine during a laboratory component of the course, which will involve designing appropriate primers, obtaining RNA from cytokine-expressing cells, performing RT/PCR, and ligating isolated, characterized fragments into cloning- and expression vectors, followed by transfection into mammalian cells. Additional bench work will include characterizing the cloned product using real time PCR, ELISA, western blot analysis,  and immunohistochemistry. Seminars on commonly used molecular techniques will be given intermittently by guest lecturers with the relevant expertise. Evaluation will be based on the student's lab techniques, class participation, and contribution to the group learning process.
MMED 410	Introduction to Human Physiology and Disease	4 Units	The purpose of this course is to give an introduction to the physiology of the major human organ systems, as well as selected associated pathophysiologies.  The course will provide a physiological basis for subsequent study and research in Molecular Medicine.  The integration of clinical faculty into the course will emphasize the importance of bringing scientific knowledge to bear on clinical problems, a theme which will be stressed throughout the Molecular Medicine curriculum.  The course will also acquaint students with medical terminology.
MMED 412	Metabolism	2 Units	The course will include a combination of interactive lectures, research presentations, related journal club article, and group projects with presentations. Topics to be covered include: bioenergetics/oxidative phosphorylation, carbohydrate metabolism; lipid and lipoprotein metabolism, amino acid and nucleotide metabolism.
MMED 413	Nucleic Acids, Gene Expression, and Gene Regulation	2 Units	The course will include a combination of interactive lectures and problem-based learning.  Each week will conclude with at least one clinical correlation where the weekly topic is presented in the context of a clinical problem.  Topics to be covered include: DNA structure, chromosome structure, replication and repair; RNA synthesis and RNA processing, the organization of eukaryotic genes and the genetic code and translation; and gene regulation.
MMED 414	Mammalian Genetics	2 Units	The course focuses on genetics, genomics, and bioinformatics, and it will include a combination of interactive lectures, problem-based learning and a week-long group project. Topics to be covered include: genetic variation; linkage studies; association studies; complex traits, linkage disequilibrium, the Hap Map, pharmacogenetics; genome-wide expression studies, and mouse models of human disease, and bioinformatics.
MMED 415	Cell Biology	2 Units	The course will include a combination of interactive lectures and problem-based learning.  Each week will conclude with at least one clinical correlation where the weekly topic is presented in the context of a clinical problem.  Topics to be covered include: cell structure and organelles, prokaryotes/eukaryotes; intracellular compartments and protein sorting; receptors/endocytosis/rafts; the nucleus; cell communication; cell division; introduction to pharmacology.
MMED 416	Host Defense: Infection and Immunity	2 Units	The course will include a reading program, lectures, and weekly problem-based student-led presentations. Weeks 1 and 2 are dedicated to establishing the scope of the field and forming vocabulary. Week 3 and part of Week 4 will cover immune mechanisms. The remainder of the course will deal with clinical aspects of immunobiology. On a regular basis Clinical Correlations, relevant to weekly topics, are integrated into the material. Topics to be covered include: biology and molecular biology of infectious agents; fundamentals of immunology; innate and adaptive responses to infection, immune effector mechanisms; and clinical aspects of immunobiology.
MMED 501	Principles of Clinical and Translational Research	4 Units	To give an introduction to the ethical, statistical, methodologic and informatics basis of clinical and translational research.  Topics will include the history of clinical and translational research, regulatory aspects of human subjects research, clinical trials study design, conflicts of interest, human subjects recruitment, research and publication ethics, technology transfer, biobank construction and utilization, and clinical and research database construction and utilization.  In addition, students will be introduced to principles of biostatistics and clinical epidemiology relevant to clinical and translational research and gain expertise in statistical tool using problem based learning sets.
MMED 504	Student Seminar Series	1 Unit	This course is designed as a weekly seminar series that will include presentations by the MMED graduate students. The format will be as follows: seminar talks by students in years 3 and beyond to provide a research update  presentations by second year students involving basic science-clinical case translation topics, and short presentations on lab rotation accomplishments by first year students.  Additional sessions include Clinical Connections presentations by practicing physicians and continuing Responsible Conduct of Research case studies with small group discussions led by program trainers. The primary goals of this series are to gain experience and improve oral presentation skills, to share results and thoughts with peers during research discussions, and to learn to take the lead in developing and asking questions during seminars.
MMED 521	Molecular aspects of the diagnosis, pathology, and treatment of selected human diseases	3 Units	The goal of this course is to integrate medical knowledge into PhD training. This team-taught seminar course focuses on a top down examination of selected human diseases starting with clinical presentations of the manifestations, diagnoses, and treatment of disease. This is followed by study of the pathology, cell biology, and molecular biology of the disease. This information forms the foundation of a final discussion of current treatment strategies and ongoing research to identify new strategies. One to two separate disease areas will be discussed during each semester, such as diabetes, colon cancer, and heart failure. The specific areas of discussion are selected to demonstrate the strength of an integrated team of clinical and basic scientists; and to provide a model for students to follow in future studies in their own area of expertise. Emphasis will be given to the basic scientific observations that formed the basis of successful clinical practice, and how this was utilized by integrated teams of basic and clinical investigators to provide better patient care. Students will prepare for discussions with close reading of the literature. Faculty will present an overview in a discussion format. It is anticipated that each disease area will be presented by an integrated team of clinical and basic scientists. The remainder of the sessions will be devoted to instruction in grant proposal writing and student preparation of a research grant proposal based upon their thesis research in advance of the student's qualifying exam.  Grading will be based both upon preparation for and participation in discussions, and upon the research proposal. Recommended Preparation: Introductory Graduate or Medical School courses in Cell Biology, Molecular Biology, and Physiology.
MMED 522	Grant Proposal Writing	2 Units	The goal of this course is to learn about the NIH institutes and grant proposal review and administration, how to compose the various sections of an NIH style grant proposal, and to gain practice in grant proposal writing skills.  The course includes weekly writing assignments covering the different sections of an NIH style grant proposal.  Upon completion of the grant proposal, students engage in a mock study section to review each other's proposals. Grading will be based on grant writing assignments and participation in the mock study section.
MMED 601	Dissertation Research	1 - 9 Units	Research leading toward the Ph.D. dissertation in Molecular Medicine.
MMED 612	Clinical Experience	2 Units	Each student will be assigned a Clinical Mentor who will co-advise the student and serve on both the Qualifying Examination Committee and Thesis Committee. The Clinical Mentor will develop an individualized curriculum for the student in consultation with the Thesis Research Mentor and Program Director. The curriculum will be organized around the integrated, multidisciplinary disease groups at the Clinic. The students will attend and actively participate in the regularly scheduled multidisciplinary clinical conference organized by their disease group (most meet for one hour every week or every other week), usually involving a combination of case presentations and research presentations. At the conclusion of the semester the student will make a presentation to the group focused on a relevant translational research problem. The Clinical Mentor will also organize a series of supervised clinical experiences (with a Mentor) to various locations where students will observe clinician interactions with patients to better understand the disease from the patient perspective and to disease-related diagnostic and research laboratories.
MMED 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	Research leading toward the Ph.D. dissertation in Molecular Medicine. Recommended preparation: Advancement to candidacy in MMED. Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
MVIR 435	Seminar in Molecular Biology/Microbiology	1 Unit	Graduate students will attend the departmental seminar given by all graduate students in the Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, in the Molecular Virology Program, and in the Cell Biology Program, as well as give a seminar on their own thesis research.  Students will be evaluated by the faculty member in charge of that student's seminar with input from the students' own thesis committee.  After each seminar, the student presenter will meet with other graduate students for peer-review of the content, delivery, and style of the seminar.  Peer reviewers will also be evaluated for the quality of their input. Offered as CLBY 435 and MBIO 435 and MVIR 435.
MVIR 445	Molecular Biology and Pathogenesis of RNA and DNA Viruses	3 Units	Through a combination of lectures by Case faculty and guest lecturers, along with student discussion of current literature, this course emphasizes mechanisms of viral gene expression and pathogenesis.  RNA viruses to be discussed include positive, negative, and retroviruses.  DNA viruses include SV40, adenovirus, herpes, papilloma, and others.  Important aspects of host defense mechanisms, antiviral agents, and viral vectors will also be covered.  Students will be evaluated based on their quality of presentation of course papers assigned to them and their overall participation in class discussions. Offered as MBIO 445 and MVIR 445. Prereq: CBIO 453 and CBIO 455.
MVIR 450	Cells and Pathogens	3 Units	Modern molecular cell biology owes a great debt to viral and bacterial pathogens as model systems.  In some instances pathogens operate by faithful mimicry of host proteins, and other cases represent the result of extensive molecular tinkering and convergent evolution.  This course will also explore numerous mechanisms utilized by pathogens to subvert the host and enhance their own survival.  Topics covered include nuclear regulatory mechanisms, protein synthesis and stability, membrane-bound organelles, endocytosis and phagocytosis, and factors that influence cell behavior such as cytoskeleton rearrangements, cell-cell interactions, and cell migration.  Additional topics include cell signaling and co-evolution of pathogens and host cell functions.  Students are expected to come to class prepared to discuss pre-assigned readings consisting of brief reviews and seminal papers from the literature.  Student assessment will be based on effective class participation (approximately 80%) and successful presentation of an independent research topic (approximately 20%). Offered as CLBY 450, MBIO 450, and MVIR 450. Prereq: CBIO 453 and CBIO 455 or permission of instructor.
MVIR 526	Cell Biology and Human Disease	3 Units	This course is designed to provide broad base of knowledge regarding cell structure and function.  The basic structure of the cell will be discussed, as will the various functional systems that are superimposed upon and interact with this structure.  The course will discuss organelle biogenesis, materials movement inside cells, cell interaction with the external environment, cell cycle and cell death regulation, cytoskeleton dynamics, quality control mechanisms, and basic signal transduction concepts.  The course will also discuss how abnormal cell function may lead to human disease, and how basic cell function may be harnessed by intracellular pathogens to provide favorable intracellular environments for replication.  The major goals of this course are to provide students with a working knowledge of the cell to facilitate understanding of the scientific literature, and to familiarize students with modern experimental approaches in cell biology.  The course will rely heavily on student participation.  Students will be provided with study guides with the expectation they will come to class prepared to lead interactive group discussions with minimal input from instructors. Offered as CLBY 526, MBIO 526 and MVIR 526.
MVIR 601	Research	1 - 18 Units	Grade of S/U only.
MVIR 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	Grade of S/U only. Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
MUHI 201	History of Western Music I	3 Units	A survey of Western music from the earliest notations to c1800. Prereq: MUTH 102 or MUTH 104.
MUHI 202	History of Western Music II	3 Units	A survey of Western music from c1800 to the present. Prereq: MUHI 201.
MUHI 310	Music Cultures of the World	3 Units	An introduction to musics of the world, focusing on the relationship of musical traditions and practices to culture and society. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
MUHI 315	History of Jazz and American Popular Music	3 Units	Musical styles and structures of jazz and American popular music; emphasis on music since 1900. Recommended preparation: MUTH 202 or MUHI 302. Offered as AFST 315 and MUHI 315. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
MUHI 316	The Lemonade Class: Religion, Race, Sex and Black Music	3 Units	Charles Long suggests that black musical forms are creative responses to the particular circumstances of black peoples' presence in the U.S and black notions of the sacred. In April of 2016, Beyoncé released her visual album Lemonade two days after the death of Prince. This course is organized around the album's title cuts and links these two artists together in an examination of religion and musical performance as creative response to the racial and gendered conditions of black life. The course investigates how both artists have used music as a platform to explore issues of race, gender, commerce, sexuality, power and divinity. The course also looks at examples from the works of earlier artists who address similar themes such as Ma Rainey, Bessie Smith, Muddy Waters, Billie Holiday, Nina Simone, Little Richard, James Brown, Marvin Gaye, and Aretha Franklin. Offered as AFST 302, ETHS 302, MUHI 316, RLGN 302, RLGN 402, and WGST 302. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
MUHI 317	Music, Mind, and Medicine	3 Units	This course examines historical and present-day intersections between music and neuroscience. Bringing together histories of medicine, sound studies, critical neuroscience, music psychology, and cognitive science, it invites students to contemplate how music shaped our conception of the brain and nervous system, as well as how auditory cultures were shaped by emerging neuroscientific theory. From the eighteenth century onward, theories of cerebral function borrowed musical instruments as metaphorical proxies: the brain was likened to a harp, a keyboard, a violin, a phonograph, and an orchestra. Sound itself was conceived as an electric medium capable of stimulating or soothing the nerves, inducing trance states, or provoking what Alan Richardson calls the neural sublime.The study of neurological disorders including aphasia helped concretize late-nineteenth-century cortical maps, laying the groundwork for the first scientific work on music cognition. Today, we use music and sound to stimulate long-term memory in individuals with Alzheimers, teach the blind to see via echolocation, and facilitate communication in children with Autism Spectrum Disorder. As we trace these developments across the semester, we contemplate the aesthetic and social aspects of neuroscience and the crucial ways in which auditory and neurological discourses have interfaced. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
MUHI 341	Introduction to Historical Performance Practice	3 Units	Summary and perspective of the problems and issues associated with the field of historical performance practices.  Offered as MUHI 341 and MUHI 441. Prereq: MUHI 301 and MUHI 302.
MUHI 342	Seminar in Historical Performance Practice	3 Units	Seminar in a specific instrument and/or vocal area of historical performance practices, such as baroque vocal, instrumental, or keyboard practices. May be repeated because topics vary. Offered as MUHI 342 and MUHI 442. Prereq: MUHI 341 or MUHI 441
MUHI 350	Topics in Music History	3 Units	Close study of a theme or aspect of music such as "Music and Gender," "Symphonies of Mahler," and "Wagner's Ring." Offered as MUHI 350 and MUHI 450.
MUHI 390	Undergraduate Seminar in Music History	3 Units	An intensive research seminar in music history for music majors. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
MUHI 395A	Capstone for Music Majors A	2 Units	Not required for the music major, but intended for music majors in concentrations other than Audio Recording who choose to complete a capstone project in music. Course consists of projects varying according to the students' area of study and interests, but each must include a document of appropriate length and scope and must be presented publicly in an appropriate forum. MUHI 395A guides students through the preliminary stages of the project and preparation of a formal Capstone proposal. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: Successful completion of MUHI 201 and MUHI 202.
MUHI 395B	Capstone for Music Majors B	1 - 4 Units	Not required for the music major, but intended for music majors in concentrations other than Audio Recording who choose to complete a capstone project in music.  Course consists of projects varying according to students' area of study and interests, but each must include a document of appropriate length and scope and must be presented publicly in an appropriate forum. MUHI 395B guides students through completion of the project, including the document and public presentation. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: Successful completion of MUHI 395A.
MUHI 399	Undergraduate Independent Studies	1 - 3 Units	Each student develops a topic of interest to be explored with a faculty member.
MUHI 401	Methodologies of Music History	3 Units	Introduction to the scholarly study of music, including principles of music bibliography, techniques of library research, and evaluation of editions.  Special emphasis given to the relationship between musical performance and research in the history and criticism of music.  Attention will also be given to design of program notes and essays. Required of first-year students in the Master of Music degree program.
MUHI 430	History of Music Pedagogy	3 Units	Examines the major shifts in pedagogical thought throughout Western music history and illuminates their effects on and relationships to musical practices and compositional trends.
MUHI 431	Medieval Music: Early Christian to 1425	3 Units	The mass, liturgical drama, and early polyphony through the Ars Nova.
MUHI 432	Music of the Renaissance	3 Units	Vocal polyphonic music from the Burgundian school through the Elizabethan madrigal.
MUHI 433	Music of the Baroque	3 Units	Musical developments from Monteverdi to Bach and Handel.
MUHI 434	Viennese Classicism	3 Units	Development of the symphony, concerto, chamber music, and opera in the works of the Mannheim composers, Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven.
MUHI 435	Nineteenth Century Music	3 Units	Romanticism and other 19th century trends in music up to impressionism.
MUHI 436	Twentieth Century Music	3 Units	Critical and analytical study of music since 1900. Examination and discussion of stylistic characteristics and aesthetic aims of contemporary composers.
MUHI 441	Introduction to Historical Performance Practice	3 Units	Summary and perspective of the problems and issues associated with the field of historical performance practices.  Offered as MUHI 341 and MUHI 441.
MUHI 442	Seminar in Historical Performance Practice	3 Units	Seminar in a specific instrument and/or vocal area of historical performance practices, such as baroque vocal, instrumental, or keyboard practices. May be repeated because topics vary. Offered as MUHI 342 and MUHI 442. Prereq: MUHI 341 or MUHI 441
MUHI 443	Medieval/Renaissance Notation	3 Units	Theory of chant, modal, mensural, and tablature notations. Practice in making literal transcriptions, editing, and preparing scores for performances.
MUHI 450	Topics in Music History	3 Units	Close study of a theme or aspect of music such as "Music and Gender," "Symphonies of Mahler," and "Wagner's Ring." Offered as MUHI 350 and MUHI 450.
MUHI 501	Special Reading (M.A. and M.M.)	1 - 18 Units	
MUHI 590	Seminar in Musicology	3 Units	Problems in musical criticism, aesthetics, and analysis, as well as interdisciplinary methodologies.
MUHI 601	Special Readings Ph.D./D.M.A.	1 - 18 Units	
MUHI 610	Research Methods in Music	3 Units	Seminar in research methods and techniques, including a historical overview of modern musicology and an introduction to different research methodologies. Significant time will be spent on writing abilities related to writing for scholarly versus general audiences.
MUHI 611	DMA Lecture-Recital and Document Seminar	3 Units	This seminar prepares DMA students from CIM to produce either the Lecture-Recital or DMA Document, a crucial degree requirement for which students must demonstrate both scholarly and musical expertise. Over the course of the semester each student will identify a viable topic, develop a bibliography, and write a prospectus. Registered students are expected to attend and participate in every session.
MUHI 612	Analysis for Music Historians	3 Units	This seminar will be required of all first-year graduate students in Musicology and Historical Performance Practices.  It seeks to develop the analytical skills of music historians, deepening their earlier technical training and teaching them how to approach repertories (music before 1700, after 1900, popular music) they are unlikely to have studied in depth previously.  In contrast to the instruction offered at CIM, this seminar will present a range of ways in which to bridge between the details of a musical composition and the historical context within which it first appeared.  The seminar deals with five case studies, one representative of each of the following repertories: Before 1700 (e.g., Josquin motets, Monteverdi madrigals, Frescobaldi toccatas) 1700-1820 (e.g., Rameau keyboard suites, Beethoven sonatas, Schubert string quartets) 1820-1910 (e.g., Berlioz Symphonie Fantastique, Brahms symphonies, Mahler songs) After 1910 (e.g., Stravinsky Sacre du Printemps, Webern Symphony, Ruth Crawford Seeger String Quartet, Ligeti Etudes) Popular Music (e.g. 12-bar blues, "rhythm changes," "Round Midnights") Of these, most students will have received training only in the analysis of music 1700-1820, and that training will have concentrated strictly on harmony and structure, without engagement with cultural context.  Each unit of this seminar will proceed from basic grammatical norms for the repertory in question to formal criticism to cultural interpretation.
MUHI 651	Thesis (M.A. and M.M.)	1 - 6 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
MUHI 699	Qualifying Exam Practicum	0 Unit	This class is meant to guide students as they prepare their bibliographies and works lists (if applicable) for their qualifying exams. We will discuss how best to address the broad topics they have chosen for their exams, and the manner in which they can begin to focus their research to an achievable list, one that they will craft with input from their exam committee. Beginning with the key works in their areas, they will be shown how best to expand the list to include current literature, and how to prioritize what should and should not be on the list.
MUHI 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
MUHI 710	Dissertation Seminar	0 Unit	This class is meant to give students a place to deal with writing their dissertation: discussion, critique, complaints, and questions are all an accepted and expected part of the process. Once during the semester students will provide the group with a chapter (or part of a chapter, or conference paper), which they will read. The group will discuss the work as a group, giving everyone a chance to provide suggestions, corrections, and other forms of critique. Everyone will get a chance to present their own work and will get many chances to read the work of others. Exposure to different topics and writing styles will not only broaden students' approach to their own work, but will also prepare them for the multiplicity of research and writing styles they'll face on the job market and in the academy.
MUHI 751	Recital Document I - D.M.A.	1 - 3 Units	
MUHI 753	Recital Document III-D.M.A.	1 - 6 Units	
ARTH 101	Art History I: Pyramids to Pagodas	3 Units	The first half of a two-semester survey of world art highlighting the major monuments of the ancient Mediterranean, medieval Europe, MesoAmerica, Africa, and Asia. Special emphasis on visual analysis, and socio-cultural contexts, and objects in the Cleveland Museum of Art. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 102	Art History II: Michelangelo to Maya Lin	3 Units	The second half of a two-semester survey of world art highlighting the major monuments of art made in Africa, the Americas, Asia, and Europe from 1400 to the present. Special emphasis on visual analysis, historical and sociocultural contexts, and objects in the Cleveland Museum of Art. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 203	The Arts of Asia	3 Units	This course surveys a selection of major developments in the arts of Asia from the bronze age to the present in a wide range of media including:  sculpture, painting, ceramics, architecture, bronzes, calligraphy, prints and contemporary installations.  We explore factors behind the making of works of art, including social, political, religious and personal meanings, while examining the historical contexts for the arts of India, China, Japan, Korea, Cambodia and Thailand. Attention will be paid to the material and stylistic qualities of art as well as art's relationship to the ideas and practices of Buddhism, Hinduism, and Daoism. Visits to the Asian galleries at the Cleveland Museum of Art form an integral part of the course. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 208	Arts of Japan	3 Units	This course explores a selection of major developments in Japanese visual and material culture from ancient times to the present day.  We consider works in multiple media including paintings, sculpture, calligraphy, ceramics, woodblock prints, architecture, performance art, and installations. We look into the roles of art in society, the relationship of art to political authority, the place of art in religious practice and experience, connections between art and literature, and how art relates to the expression of personal, social, political, and cultural identity. We pay particular attention to tea ceramics, Edo and Meiji period, woodblock prints, Chinese and Euro-American influences on Japanese art, works associated with Buddhist religious practices and ideas such as ink painting, portraiture, and statuary connected with Zen. We also examine the role of museums in selecting, preserving, and presenting Japanese art in the 20th and 21st century. Visits to the Cleveland Museum of Art form an integral part of the course. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 220	Jewish Art and Architecture	3 Units	Tradition and transformation in Jewish artistic expression over time and across space.  Course will begin with biblical period and continue down to the present day in Israel and America.  Examination of how concepts such as "Jewish" and "art" undergo change within the Jewish community over this period. Offered as ARTH 220, JDST 220, and RLGN 220. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 230	Art, Power, and Identity in Ancient Rome	3 Units	This course explores the history of ancient Roman art and architecture, with a particular emphasis on the Roman Empire. We will focus on situating objects and monument in the changing historical, cultural, political, and religious contexts of the Roman world. The course will introduce students to famous buildings such as the Colosseum and the Pantheon in Rome, but we will also look at lesser known but equally fascinating works that offer insight into the imaginations, aspirations, and identities of the Roman Empire's diverse population. From statues and paintings to oil lamps with erotic scenes, drinking cups with images of famous athletes, and even travel souvenirs, Romans were surrounded by images and objects that allowed them to participate in but also shape and resist a broader imperial culture. Students will consider how art and architecture shaped the complex ways that people living in the Roman world related to the empire and to more regional and local cultural traditions from Egypt and North Africa, Northern Europe, and the Near East. Finally, we will also examine how the legacy of Roman art and architecture continues to fuel debates about power, politics, and representation in the United States, including controversies over Confederate monuments. The course will include frequent visits to the Cleveland Museum of Art and other area sites such as Lakeview Cemetery (where some Cleveland patrons commissioned exact replicas of Roman monuments!). Offered as ARTH 230 and CLSC 230. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 241	Medieval Art	3 Units	This course will introduce students to the pivotal works of art created between approximately 250 and 1500.  We will discuss painting, sculpture, architecture, manuscript illumination, and graphic arts. Medieval visual and material culture will be considered within the framework of socio-political developments, rapid urban growth, the flowering of monastic culture, the rise of universities, and changes in devotional practices.  While the course will primarily focus on western part of the medieval Christendom, we will also discuss Jewish, Byzantine, and Islamic art.  Visits to the CMA will form an integral part of the course. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 250	Art in the Age of Discovery	3 Units	A survey of developments in Renaissance art and architecture in northern Europe and Italy during a new age of science, discovery and exploration, 1400-1600.
ARTH 260	Art in Early Modern Europe	3 Units	A survey of European art in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, an era of rising nationalism, political aggrandizement, religious expansion and extravagant art patronage.  The tensions between naturalism and idealization, court and city, public and private, church and secular patronage, grand commissions and an open air market, will provide themes of the course as we explore what characterized the arts of Austria, Belgium, England, France, Germany, Italy, The Netherlands, and Spain. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 270	American Art and Culture Before 1900	3 Units	Survey of the development of American art from colonial times to the present which explores how art has expressed both American values and American anxieties.  Painting is emphasized, but the course also considers architecture, the decorative arts, film, literature, and music. Offered as AMST 270 and ARTH 270.
ARTH 271	American Art and Culture: The Twentieth Century	3 Units	Survey of the development of American art from 1900 to the present (and the future) which will explore how art has expressed both American values and American anxieties.  Painting will be emphasized, but the course will also consider architecture, the decorative arts, film, literature, and music. Offered as AMST 271 and ARTH 271.
ARTH 274	Nineteenth-Century European Art	3 Units	This course will examine the development of European art across the tumultuous long nineteenth century, from the French Revolution in 1789 to the eve of the First World War in 1914.  Adopting a thematic, as well as an international approach, this course will seek to interrogate the canonical understanding of this period of dramatic change across France, Britain, Germany, and Spain.  We will explore issues of politics, economics, class, gender, imperialism, nationalism, and industrialization that surround the advent of artistic modernity.  The class will also consider a range of artistic media, including painting, sculpture, photography, the decorative arts, and architecture, taking advantage of the rich collections of the Cleveland Museum of Art. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 280	Modern Art and Modern World	3 Units	This course will explore the development of modern art, primarily the art of Europe and the United States, from the late 18th to the mid-20th century. Tracing key art movements and the careers of significant artists from the U.S. and diverse European cultures, including France, Germany, Italy, Russia, and the Netherlands, this course will not only examine innovations in style, materials, technique, subject matter, and theory in modern art history, but will also analyze issues related to the rise of new social classes, cross-cultural interactions among these classes, gender and race, industrialization and technological development, as well as changes to the urban environment and the development of popular culture in modern society. Through the examination of artists' responses to technological, cultural, social, and political changes, this course will explore the emergence and development of modernity and modernism in European and American art. Visits to the Cleveland Museum of Art (CMA) will form an integral part of the course. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 284	History of Photography	3 Units	A survey of the history of photography from its inception in 1839 to the present.  Emphasis is on the complex relationship between technological innovations and picture-making; the artistic, documentary, and personal uses of photography; and the relationship of photography to other art forms.
ARTH 286	Introduction to Contemporary Art	3 Units	This course will explore contemporary art and visual culture since the 1960s with a focus on major artistic movements and artists. The first part of the course will focus on changes in artistic practices in the United States and Europe, through the study of Pop Art, Minimalism, Conceptual Art, Institutional Critique, Performance Art, Feminist Art, and Activist Art. The second part of the course will investigate the global turn in contemporary art from the 1980s onward introducing art from Asia, Africa, and the Middle East. This course will examine a set of issues related to postmodernism, postcolonialism, globalization, and transnationalism and trace cultural, social, and geopolitical shifts in contemporary art. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 302	Buddhist Art in Asia	3 Units	This course explores the visual and material culture of Buddhism in Asia from its origins in India to its transmission and transformation in China, Korea, Japan, Tibet, Thailand, Cambodia and Indonesia.  Our historically and culturally structured examination traces major developments in Buddhist art and their relationships with belief, practice, and ritual.  We consider the ways that artistic traditions have adapted and evolved both within individual cultures and cross-culturally. We primarily focus on studying the historical contexts for sculpture, architecture, and painting, but we also consider the movement of Buddhist works from temples to sites of secular display in museums around the world, and the religious, cultural, and ethical issues that arise from these moves.  Topics include:  representations of the life of the historical Buddha; visual programs of temples; artistic representations of paradises and hells; sacred sites and architecture; imperial patronage of Buddhist art; the role of art in pilgrimage and ritual; and visual imagery associated with Pure Land, Chan, Zen and esoteric traditions.  Visits to and engagement with objects in the new Asian galleries at the Cleveland Museum of Art provide a rich environment for our class sessions and student projects. Offered as ARTH 302 and ARTH 402. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 307	Arts of China	3 Units	This course explores a selection of major developments in Chinese visual and material culture from ancient times to the present day.  We consider works in multiple media including bronzes, pottery, sculpture, calligraphy, paintings, ceramics and installations. We look into the roles of art in society, the relationship of art to political authority, the place of art in religious practice and experience, connections between art and literature, and how art relates to the expression of personal, social, political, and cultural identity. We pay particular attention to landscape painting; pictorial and sculptural programs of Buddhist grottoes; art commissioned and collected by the imperial court; objects associated with Daoist, Buddhist, and Confucian religious practices and sacred sites; art produced during periods of non-Chinese rule under the Mongols and Manchus; the affects of foreign styles and ideas on artists; and the role of Chinese artists in the contemporary global art world and market. We also examine the role of museums in selecting, preserving, and presenting Chinese art in the 20th and 21st century. Visits to the Cleveland Museum of Art form an integral part of the course.  Offered as ARTH 307 and ARTH 407. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 308	Daoism: Visual Culture, History and Practice	3 Units	This course explores developments in the visual culture, history and practices of Daoist religious traditions in China from the third to twentieth centuries. Our historically and conceptually structured examination draws upon a balance of visual, textual, and material sources, while considering the various approaches scholars have employed to understand the history and development of Daoist traditions. Topics include: sacred scriptures and liturgies, biographies and visual narratives, iconography and functions of the pantheon of gods and immortals, views of the self and the body, practices of inner alchemy and self-cultivation, thunder deities and exorcism, dietetics and medicine and modes of meditation and ritual. Offered as ARTH 308, ARTH 408, and RLGN 308. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 315	Art and Architecture of Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia	3 Units	The golden mask of Tutankhamun, the imposing Ishtar Gate, delicately carved ivories, and expertly chiseled stone sculpture; the art and architecture of Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia are some of the most captivating examples of visual culture from the ancient world. This course will emphasize the examination of art and architecture of Egypt and Mesopotamia in context, focusing on material from prehistory through the 6th century BC. We will explore the deep connection between art, religion, and the worldview of Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, in addition to the meaning and audience for art, the principles which guided art production, trends in media and themes over time, and the relationship of writing and art. We will also consider the interaction between Egyptian and Mesopotamian art, museums and the modern artistic and political landscapes. Offered as ANEE 315, ANEE 415, ARTH 315 and ARTH 415.
ARTH 316	Methods in Public Humanities and Civic Engagement	3 Units	Who has access to knowledge and why? How is knowledge produced and publicized? What and where is the public? Who is included and excluded in this public?  What is the role of art and culture in various publics? This innovative new course will address these questions as it introduces students to the theories and methods of the Public Humanities and Civic Engagement. Broadly defined, Public Humanities works to engage diverse publics in the subjects of the humanities by making topics like art history, literary history, film, and theater, accessible and understandable to a wider civic audience, but it also interrogates the concept of the expert and seeks to find experts in the field, rather than exclusively in the academy.  Through a combination of reading, discussion, and virtual (or in person) visits from leaders of Cleveland-area organizations, administrators, legislators, and public historians, this course will teach you how to put your degrees to work for the greater good! Although this course is about Public Humanities & Civic Engagement, it is open to students in all fields across the university who are interested in ways to integrate the community in their education and to think creatively about the types of work their academic training prepares them to do. Undergraduate and graduate students will benefit from opportunities to broaden their professional networks and to learn more about the kinds of skills that are necessary in professions across the disciplines. Offered as ARTH 316, ARTH 416, HUMN 316, and HUMN 416.
ARTH 325	Art at the Crossroads of Religion: Polytheistic, Christian, and Islamic Art in Antiquity	3 Units	People often single out the reign of Constantine (A.D. 306-337) as the point in history when Rome transformed from a polytheistic empire to a Christian empire. This course questions the strict divide between the categories of "pagan" and "Christian" in Rome in the imperial period and beyond. Through a close examination of the artistic and architectural record, students will come to understand that this dichotomy is a modern invention; for people living in the Roman Empire, religious identities were extraordinarily fluid. Indeed, traditional polytheistic religion and Christianity remained closely intertwined for centuries after Constantine "Christianized" the Empire. Moreover, religious pluralism had been a fundamental part of Roman culture since the founding of ancient Rome. We will survey a range of material culture, including public statuary, sarcophagi, silver hordes, and temples and churches. We will also examine sites such as the border city of Dura-Europos in Syria to explore how religious identities in the Roman Empire (including Judaism, early Christianity, and so-called mystery cults) intertwined even when Rome was still supposedly a "pagan" Empire. The course pays particular attention to the art and architecture produced under Constantine, whom people today often remember as Rome's first Christian emperor but who represents, in fact, a complex amalgam of polytheistic and monotheistic practices and identities. We will also explore how Christian art slowly but ultimately became the predominant visual culture in the Roman Empire. Finally, we will examine how Early Islamic art and architecture exploited the Greco-Roman visual tradition to the ends of this new religion. Offered as ARTH 325, ARTH 425 and CLSC 325. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 329	Marvels of Rome: Monuments and Their Decoration in the Roman Empire	3 Units	This course examines some of the most famous monuments of the Roman Empire, including Nero's Golden House, the Colosseum, the Pantheon, Hadrian's Villa at Tivoli, and the lavish villa of Piazza Armerina in Sicily. We will study each monument in depth, delving into the architecture, paintings, sculptures, mosaics, and social functions of each monument. Students will learn how to analyze artistic and archaeological evidence, ancient textual evidence (poems, prose, and inscriptions), and secondary scholarship to reconstruct the visual appearances and historical and cultural contexts of the monuments in questions. Throughout the course, students will gain a new appreciation and deeper understanding of some of the most iconic buildings of the classical tradition. Offered as ARTH 329, ARTH 429, and CLSC 329. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 333	Greek and Roman Painting	3 Units	Greek vase painting, Etruscan tomb painting and Roman wall painting. The development of monumental painting in antiquity. Offered as ARTH 333, CLSC 333, and ARTH 433.
ARTH 335	Issues in Ancient Art	3 Units	Various topics in Ancient art.  Lectures, discussions and reports. Offered as ARTH 335 and ARTH 435.
ARTH 336	Representations of War in Ancient Rome	3 Units	Few societies in history have been as militaristic as ancient Rome--or as proud of their warrior culture. This course examines the many ways that Romans constructed and contested their conceptions of war from the founding of the Roman Republic in 509 B.C.E. to the reign of Constantine (306-337 C.E.). Why did Romans choose to represent war in certain ways, and how did these artistic representations shape Romans' military values? What can the visual record tell us about how different groups (soldiers, women, slaves) experienced war in the Roman world? We will explore major public monuments in the city of Rome (including triumphal arches and the Colosseum) and private objects (such as silver drinking vessels) to observe how Roman militarism pervaded different walks of life. We will also examine monuments on the edges of Rome's empire, such as the towering trophies in modern France and Romania, to explore how works of art and architecture mediated the relationship between Romans and the peoples they conquered. Students will be encouraged to think about how art and architecture contributed to the construction of militarism as a chief Roman value, but also about how visual representations provided an important means to debate the value of Rome's military efforts, to subvert Rome's rigidly hierarchical social order, and to grapple with what it meant to "be Roman" as wars transformed Rome from a small city in Italy to a massive, pan-Mediterranean empire. After exploring Romans' conceptions of war and victory, students also may ask whether the common comparison between the Roman Empire and modern America is appropriate. Offered as ARTH 336, ARTH 436, CLSC 336 and CLSC 436. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 341	Issues in the Art of Japan	3 Units	This is a topics course.  Each offering will focus on a specific topic within the area of Japanese art.  Sample topics may include: Muromachi Hanging Scrolls, Ryoan-ji Temple Garden Architecture, Rimpa School Panel Screens, Buddhist Panting in the Edo Period.  Lectures, discussions, and reports. Offered as ARTH 341 and ARTH 441.
ARTH 344	Archaeology of the Ancient World	3 Units	This course examines the great civilizations of the ancient world, particularly those of the Ancient Near East, Egypt, Greece and Rome, through the archaeological record. Each of these geographic areas and their respective cultures will be individually explored, but also examined within a broader historical context. Particular focus will be placed on the social, political, religious, and economic ideas that were exchanged across Mesopotamia, Anatolia, the Levant and the Mediterranean and the influence this interconnectivity had on these ancient societies.  Offered as ANEE 344, ANEE 444, ANTH 344, ANTH 444, ARTH 344, ARTH 444, CLSC 344 and CLSC 444. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 349	Gothic Art: Vision and Matter	3 Units	This course will examine the development and dissemination of Gothic art in Western Europe in the High and Late Middle Ages.  We will consider a variety of media, including architecture, metalwork, sculpture, manuscript illumination, panel paintings, fresco cycles, and small devotional objects.  As we study medieval art in its socio-historical contexts--private and public, monastic and political, liturgical and lay--we will pay special attention to issues of patronage, relationships between texts and images, the introduction of visionary and mystical devotion, attitudes towards education and authority, differences between male and female piety, modes of medieval viewing, and reception and manipulation of art by medieval audiences.  Visits to the CMA will form an integral part of the course. Offered as ARTH 349 and ARTH 449. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 350	Issues in Medieval Art	3 Units	Various topics in Medieval Art. Lectures, discussions, and reports. Offered as ARTH 350 and ARTH 450.
ARTH 353	Sixteenth Century Italian Art	3 Units	The development of the High Renaissance and Mannerist styles in Italy and late 16th century trends: painting and sculpture. Offered as ARTH 353 and ARTH 453.
ARTH 354	Global Renaissance Art	3 Units	As a result of Roman Catholic missions to Africa and Asia, colonial occupation in Latin America, and mercantile trade with the Ottoman empire, European artists and patrons developed increasingly complex modes of cultural production in the early modern period.  Adopting an interdisciplinary approach that encompasses art, anthropology, history, and literature, this course reassesses the geographic parameters of the Renaissance and asks students to consider what words like "native" and "foreign" might have meant in the 15th-17th centuries. Course readings will be available on Canvas.  Requirements: a series of short, critical reflection papers; a longer 12-15 pg. research paper, and active participation in class discussions and group activities. Separate requirements will apply to graduate students. Offered as ARTH 354 and ARTH 454.
ARTH 355	The Book in the Middle Ages: The Christian, Jewish, and Islamic Tradition	3 Units	This course will examine later medieval manuscript production, paying particular attention to the issues of patronage, gender, literacy, reception, and cultural biases. We will explore the imagery and texts of monastic and courtly manuscripts, travel books and devotional manuals, all within the framework of the tightly interwoven theological and social discourses of the institutions that commissioned them. As the title of the course indicates, we will study Christian, Jewish, and Islamic books and their interrelations; for example, we will compare Islamic encyclopedias of the natural world, such as Zakariya ibn Muhammad al-Qazwini's illustrated Wonders of Creation, with medieval bestiaries, herbals, and encyclopedias such as Hartman Schedel's Liber Chronicarum and Les Merveilles du Monde. Each religious culture will receive a special close-study spotlight: Jewish Haggadot (books for the Passover Seder), Christian courtly romances, and Islamic manuscripts of the Shahnama epic. Offered as ARTH 355 and ARTH 455. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 356	Medieval Matters: The Monstrous, the Macabre, the Miraculous	3 Units	This course will explore three distinct but interrelated topics in medieval visual culture, which haunt the modern world as well. We will first study the concepts of the monsters and the monstrous in medieval Europe, as they were manifested in visual, literary, and cryptozoological production. From monster theory to monster culture, we will look at the anxieties that the monsters--those from the edges, those from within--have written on the body of medieval art. These same anxieties, rooted in the fear of difference, manifest themselves in the macabre art: the art of living death that predicated material universe of the late Middle Ages. We will explore the ghosts and the revenants, the living corpses and the nimble skeletons that populate medieval murals, manuscripts, and sculpture. All this is wrapped into the notion of the miraculous, both wondrous and dangerous at once. Here, the focus will be on female bodies, seen as monstrous, macabre, and miraculous at once. Students should be prepared to discuss these topics both within the context of medieval Europe and within our own historical moment. Offered as ARTH 356 and ARTH 456.
ARTH 357	Medieval Wonders: Monuments from Across the Globe	3 Units	This course will introduce art of the medieval world, considered globally, with a special focus on monuments surviving from the seventh to fifteenth centuries. Emphasis will be on sculpture and architecture; other media--manuscript illumination, wall paintings, ceramics, and metalwork--will be discussed in conjunction with the related sites. We will travel, virtually, to Pre-Columbian Yucatan, Judeo-Christian Europe, Islamic Spain and Central Asia, Hindu and Buddhist India, Tibet, and Southeast Asia. Each week one or two monuments will be discussed in depth, and other sites will be introduced to place it into historical and art historical contexts. Among the themes we will explore are the power relationships between sovereignty and religion; visual expressions of politics and propaganda; the ways literature, performance, and devotion informed medieval material culture; the importance of pilgrimage; and influences of international trade. Ethical and nationalist issues surrounding looting and cultural patrimony will also be discussed. Objects from CMA's permanent collections will form an integral part of the course. Each unit will end with the consideration of collecting practices. Offered as ARTH 357 and ARTH 457.
ARTH 358	Medieval Body	3 Units	This course will explore the meanings and representations of the body in western medieval culture.  Topics will include bleeding bodies, fragmented bodies, lactating bodies, labile bodies, cosmic bodies, physiological bodies, mystical bodies, suffering bodies, edible bodies, enclosed bodies, gendered bodies, Christ's bodies, Mary's bodies, decomposing bodies, macabre bodies, resurrected bodies, dead bodies, intercessory bodies, unhinging bodies, translucent bodies, martyred bodies, desirable bodies, desirous bodies, abhorrent bodies, mimetic bodies, nude bodies, marginalized bodies, defleshed bodies, social bodies, political bodies, monstrous bodies, mnemonic bodies, and deformed bodies.  We will explore the complex rhetoric of embodiment as it manifests itself in the ambiguous discourse--both medieval and contemporary--on the relationships between the material and intangible, spiritual and physical, somatic and mental, corporeal and ethereal. Offered as ARTH 358 and ARTH 458. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 360	Renaissance Art in Northern Europe	3 Units	Painting, sculpture, and the graphic arts in Belgium, France, Germany, and The Netherlands, 1400-1580, highlighting the careers and contributions of specific artists such as Jan van Eyck, Albrecht Durer, and Pieter Bruegel.  We will also analyze the changing social, cultural, religious, and political circumstances of the art made during this period, which saw the invention of printmaking, the Protestant Revolution, and increased strife between rulers and their subjects.  The rise of new subjects such as landscape and scene of everyday life will be explored, and changes in patronage will be discussed, concentrating on the shift from church and noble patronage to increasingly middle-class patronage related to the beginnings of the open art market. Offered as ARTH 360 and ARTH 460. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 361	17th-Century Art in Belgium and The Netherlands	3 Units	The arts of painting, drawing, and printmaking in Belgium and The Netherlands are discussed in relationship to political, social, cultural, and religious contexts.  We will explore the careers and production of individual artists such as Rubens, Van Dyck, Hals, Rembrandt, and Vermeer.  Developments in new subjects, artistic specialization, and the expansion of the open market are seen as important factors in shaping Belgian and Dutch art. Offered as ARTH 361 and ARTH 461. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 362	Issues in Early Modern Southern European Art	3 Units	Various topics in the art of southern Europe, 1400-1800. Lectures, discussions, reports, and gallery visits in the CMA.   Offered as ARTH 362 and ARTH 462. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 367	17th and 18th Century Art in France	3 Units	A Survey of the arts of painting, sculpture and architecture in France from 1600-1780, a period in which France became the leading political and cultural power in Europe.  We will focus on the relationship between the arts and changing social, cultural, religious and political circumstances at a time that saw the rise of the absolute state before the French Revolution, the increased use of art for political propaganda, and the burgeoning of a consumer culture in the middle class. Offered as ARTH 367 and ARTH 467. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 368	Doors Wide Shut: The Private Art Collection from Raphael to Rauschenberg	3 Units	A child's room is often stocked with marvels: bird nests, shells, shiny stones, books, and drawings. The great art collections of the Renaissance began in much the same way as these playful assemblages. From cabinets of curiosities containing treasures from foreign lands, to paintings of nude women by Titian and Raphael, these early collections marked the beginning of the modern art museum. What do the hoarding tendencies of the Jesuit Athanasius Kircher (1601-1680), founder of the `Kircherianum--a museum filled with taxidermy animals and mechanical inventions--have in common with Ronald Lauder's recent and widely publicized purchase of a Gustav Klimt painting for $135 million? Famous American art collectors of the 19th & 20th centuries like Henry Clay Frick, Isabella Stewart Gardner, and Peggy Guggenheim opened these formerly private realms of display to the public, revealing the complex motives and politics inherent to the practice of art collection. This course will focus first on the conceptual issues that informed early modern collecting in the western world, and subsequently the way that these ideas and modalities later inflected and shaped the history of modern collecting--particularly in the private sector in Europe and America. Offered as: ARTH 368 and ARTH 468. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 374	Impressionism to Symbolism	3 Units	Major developments in European painting and sculpture during the latter half of the nineteenth century. Post-impressionism synthetism, symbolism, and the arts and crafts movement considered in their socio-cultural contexts. Works of Degas, Manet, Monet, Klimt, Bocklin, Gauguin, etc. Offered as ARTH 374 and ARTH 474.
ARTH 379	Issues in 19th Century Art	3 Units	Various topics in 19th century art, with class lectures, discussions and reports. Consult department for current topic. Offered as ARTH 379 and ARTH 479.
ARTH 382	Art, Eco-criticism, and the Environment	3 Units	As issues of sustainability and environmental impact have become increasingly dominant concerns in contemporary society, eco-criticism has emerged as a vital methodological thread across the humanities.  Motivated by ethical as well as scholarly concerns, eco-criticism not only enacts a fundamental examination of nature as an ideological construct, but also seeks to investigate the complex interrelationship between humanity and the environment.  Concurrently, there has been a marked interest in studying the role of "green issues" in contemporary art, particularly in tracing the development of earth art or eco-art from the early 1970s to the present.  The goal of this seminar is to forge a link between these two emergent strands by tracing the complex relationship between art and the environment from the nineteenth-century to the present, seeking to thereby assess the capaciousness of eco-criticism as a methodological approach to art history. Offered as ARTH 382, ARTH 482 and ESTD 382. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 385	Issues in the History of Industrial Design	3 Units	One of the most momentous occurrences of the 20th and 21st Centuries has received surprisingly little attention:  the transformation in how nearly everything around us is designed and made.  Chairs, desks, pens, cars, stoves, refrigerators, printing presses, lighting fixtures, and children's toys all look very different than they did a century ago, and often are made through manufacturing process and out of materials that did not exist then.  The history of industrial design can be traced back to the 19th century, and to the writings of social reformers such as William Morris and the teachings of progressive art schools such as the Bauhaus, which introduced a machine-made look and many classic modern designs, such as the Wassily Chair by Marcel Breuer.  But the term industrial design was only coined in 1929, and modern industrial design, which brought together careful analysis of engineering, manufacturing, marketing, styling, branding and streamlining--really dates from that period through the creations of a group of pioneering, unheralded American geniuses, such as Raymond Lowie, Norman Bel Geddes, Henry Dreyfuss, Walter Dorwin Teague, Brooks Stevens, Russel Wright, Eliot Noyes, Viktor Schreckengost, and Harley Earl.  In broad strokes, this class will lay out a history of industrial design from its origins until today.  It will combine discussion of the work of historically significant figures, who established the basic framework of the field, with analysis of products being made today, by figures such as Dieter Rams, Jony Ive, and Philippe Starck.  The class will also include a tour of and introduction to the Industrial Design program of the Cleveland Institute of Art, established by the great industrial designer and artist Viktor Schreckengost in 1933.  The class will also view objects from the collections of the Western Reserve Historical Society, the Cleveland Museum of Art, and other arts institutions in the Greater Cleveland area. Offered as ARTH 385 and ARTH 485.
ARTH 386	Issues in American Art	3 Units	Various topics in American art.  Each offering will focus on a specific topic within American art.  Lectures, discussions, and report.  The course will entail regular oral classroom reports and short writing assignments as well as a final paper.  Producing an intellectually significant final paper is the major goal of the class.   Graduate students are expected to produce a final paper of greater length than Undergraduates and that shows evidence of original scholarship. Offered as ARTH 386 and ARTH 486.
ARTH 392	Issues in 20th/21st Century Art	3 Units	Various topics in 20th/21st century art, with class lectures, discussions, and reports. Offered as ARTH 392 and ARTH 492.
ARTH 393	Contemporary Art: Critical Directions	3 Units	An examination of the directions taken by avant-garde American art and criticism in the aftermath of Abstract Expressionism.  Includes the rise and fall of modernism in the 1960s and '70s, as well as an investigation of Post-modern trends and theories. Offered as ARTH 393 and ARTH 493.
ARTH 394	Departmental Seminar	3 Units	The Department of History of Art and Art departmental seminar. A topical course, emphasizing disciplinary writing and modes of investigation and analysis. It is recommended for Art History majors before the majors seminar/capstone course, typically taken in the junior or senior years. The course advances the goals of SAGES within the disciplinary context of art history by focusing on close readings of art history texts (with an emphasis upon methodological approaches), examination of original works of art when possible, analytical writing, and intensive seminar-style discussion. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
ARTH 395	Internship	3 Units	This course is designated for students seeking professional experience in art history.  It focuses on the museum experience (registration, exhibition, interpretation, and administration) although students may also elect to conduct internships in museum-related environments such as art conservation. Students are encouraged to have gained significant experience in art history coursework before embarking on an internship.  Students must identify an internship and supervisor as well as a campus internship supervisor the semester before enrolling in the internship. Recommended preparation: ARTH 101, ARTH 102, or ARTH 104, and consent.
ARTH 396	Majors Seminar	3 Units	Capstone course required of all undergraduate Art History majors, typically taken in senior year.  Requires professional-level research with peer and faculty oversight culminating in formal written and oral presentations.  Limited to Art History majors. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
ARTH 397	Contemporary Art in East Asia	3 Units	This course will explore modern and contemporary art and visual culture in East Asia produced since the mid-twentieth century with a focus on major artistic movements and artists active in China, Japan, and Korea. Encountering complicated geopolitical and socioeconomic conditions in the post-war era, a series of experimental and radical artistic, cultural, and political movements have emerged in East Asia. The course will map the critical topographies of Asian art from 1945 to the 1980s through the exploration of the following: post-war art and experimental art in Japan and Korea, Chinese art during the Cultural Revolution, material culture in Japanese Mono-ha and Korean Dansaekhwa, and art of resistance in China and Korea in the 1980s. The course will also investigate contemporary Asian art and visual culture focusing on its global turn from the late 1980s. Fueled by international geopolitical change, economic boom, and the impact of globalization, art in Asia or by Asian artists has gained a high level of international visibility and taken a central position in contemporary art exhibitions and art criticism. This visual, social, and theoretical development in the recent art in Asia will be examined through key issues and themes: art's revisiting of tradition and history, its exploration of body and identity, the impact of consumerism and popular culture, and its engagement with public space and the urban environment. Offered as ARTH 397 and ARTH 497. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 398	Independent Study in Art History	1 - 3 Units	Individual research and reports on special topics.
ARTH 399	Honors Thesis	3 Units	Intensive study of a topic or problem leading to the preparation of an honors thesis.
ARTH 402	Buddhist Art in Asia	3 Units	This course explores the visual and material culture of Buddhism in Asia from its origins in India to its transmission and transformation in China, Korea, Japan, Tibet, Thailand, Cambodia and Indonesia.  Our historically and culturally structured examination traces major developments in Buddhist art and their relationships with belief, practice, and ritual.  We consider the ways that artistic traditions have adapted and evolved both within individual cultures and cross-culturally. We primarily focus on studying the historical contexts for sculpture, architecture, and painting, but we also consider the movement of Buddhist works from temples to sites of secular display in museums around the world, and the religious, cultural, and ethical issues that arise from these moves.  Topics include:  representations of the life of the historical Buddha; visual programs of temples; artistic representations of paradises and hells; sacred sites and architecture; imperial patronage of Buddhist art; the role of art in pilgrimage and ritual; and visual imagery associated with Pure Land, Chan, Zen and esoteric traditions.  Visits to and engagement with objects in the new Asian galleries at the Cleveland Museum of Art provide a rich environment for our class sessions and student projects. Offered as ARTH 302 and ARTH 402. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 407	Arts of China	3 Units	This course explores a selection of major developments in Chinese visual and material culture from ancient times to the present day.  We consider works in multiple media including bronzes, pottery, sculpture, calligraphy, paintings, ceramics and installations. We look into the roles of art in society, the relationship of art to political authority, the place of art in religious practice and experience, connections between art and literature, and how art relates to the expression of personal, social, political, and cultural identity. We pay particular attention to landscape painting; pictorial and sculptural programs of Buddhist grottoes; art commissioned and collected by the imperial court; objects associated with Daoist, Buddhist, and Confucian religious practices and sacred sites; art produced during periods of non-Chinese rule under the Mongols and Manchus; the affects of foreign styles and ideas on artists; and the role of Chinese artists in the contemporary global art world and market. We also examine the role of museums in selecting, preserving, and presenting Chinese art in the 20th and 21st century. Visits to the Cleveland Museum of Art form an integral part of the course.  Offered as ARTH 307 and ARTH 407. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 408	Daoism: Visual Culture, History and Practice	3 Units	This course explores developments in the visual culture, history and practices of Daoist religious traditions in China from the third to twentieth centuries. Our historically and conceptually structured examination draws upon a balance of visual, textual, and material sources, while considering the various approaches scholars have employed to understand the history and development of Daoist traditions. Topics include: sacred scriptures and liturgies, biographies and visual narratives, iconography and functions of the pantheon of gods and immortals, views of the self and the body, practices of inner alchemy and self-cultivation, thunder deities and exorcism, dietetics and medicine and modes of meditation and ritual. Offered as ARTH 308, ARTH 408, and RLGN 308. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 415	Art and Architecture of Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia	3 Units	The golden mask of Tutankhamun, the imposing Ishtar Gate, delicately carved ivories, and expertly chiseled stone sculpture; the art and architecture of Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia are some of the most captivating examples of visual culture from the ancient world. This course will emphasize the examination of art and architecture of Egypt and Mesopotamia in context, focusing on material from prehistory through the 6th century BC. We will explore the deep connection between art, religion, and the worldview of Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, in addition to the meaning and audience for art, the principles which guided art production, trends in media and themes over time, and the relationship of writing and art. We will also consider the interaction between Egyptian and Mesopotamian art, museums and the modern artistic and political landscapes. Offered as ANEE 315, ANEE 415, ARTH 315 and ARTH 415.
ARTH 416	Methods in Public Humanities and Civic Engagement	3 Units	Who has access to knowledge and why? How is knowledge produced and publicized? What and where is the public? Who is included and excluded in this public?  What is the role of art and culture in various publics? This innovative new course will address these questions as it introduces students to the theories and methods of the Public Humanities and Civic Engagement. Broadly defined, Public Humanities works to engage diverse publics in the subjects of the humanities by making topics like art history, literary history, film, and theater, accessible and understandable to a wider civic audience, but it also interrogates the concept of the expert and seeks to find experts in the field, rather than exclusively in the academy.  Through a combination of reading, discussion, and virtual (or in person) visits from leaders of Cleveland-area organizations, administrators, legislators, and public historians, this course will teach you how to put your degrees to work for the greater good! Although this course is about Public Humanities & Civic Engagement, it is open to students in all fields across the university who are interested in ways to integrate the community in their education and to think creatively about the types of work their academic training prepares them to do. Undergraduate and graduate students will benefit from opportunities to broaden their professional networks and to learn more about the kinds of skills that are necessary in professions across the disciplines. Offered as ARTH 316, ARTH 416, HUMN 316, and HUMN 416.
ARTH 425	Art at the Crossroads of Religion: Polytheistic, Christian, and Islamic Art in Antiquity	3 Units	People often single out the reign of Constantine (A.D. 306-337) as the point in history when Rome transformed from a polytheistic empire to a Christian empire. This course questions the strict divide between the categories of "pagan" and "Christian" in Rome in the imperial period and beyond. Through a close examination of the artistic and architectural record, students will come to understand that this dichotomy is a modern invention; for people living in the Roman Empire, religious identities were extraordinarily fluid. Indeed, traditional polytheistic religion and Christianity remained closely intertwined for centuries after Constantine "Christianized" the Empire. Moreover, religious pluralism had been a fundamental part of Roman culture since the founding of ancient Rome. We will survey a range of material culture, including public statuary, sarcophagi, silver hordes, and temples and churches. We will also examine sites such as the border city of Dura-Europos in Syria to explore how religious identities in the Roman Empire (including Judaism, early Christianity, and so-called mystery cults) intertwined even when Rome was still supposedly a "pagan" Empire. The course pays particular attention to the art and architecture produced under Constantine, whom people today often remember as Rome's first Christian emperor but who represents, in fact, a complex amalgam of polytheistic and monotheistic practices and identities. We will also explore how Christian art slowly but ultimately became the predominant visual culture in the Roman Empire. Finally, we will examine how Early Islamic art and architecture exploited the Greco-Roman visual tradition to the ends of this new religion. Offered as ARTH 325, ARTH 425 and CLSC 325. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 429	Marvels of Rome: Monuments and Their Decoration in the Roman Empire	3 Units	This course examines some of the most famous monuments of the Roman Empire, including Nero's Golden House, the Colosseum, the Pantheon, Hadrian's Villa at Tivoli, and the lavish villa of Piazza Armerina in Sicily. We will study each monument in depth, delving into the architecture, paintings, sculptures, mosaics, and social functions of each monument. Students will learn how to analyze artistic and archaeological evidence, ancient textual evidence (poems, prose, and inscriptions), and secondary scholarship to reconstruct the visual appearances and historical and cultural contexts of the monuments in questions. Throughout the course, students will gain a new appreciation and deeper understanding of some of the most iconic buildings of the classical tradition. Offered as ARTH 329, ARTH 429, and CLSC 329. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 433	Greek and Roman Painting	3 Units	Greek vase painting, Etruscan tomb painting and Roman wall painting. The development of monumental painting in antiquity. Offered as ARTH 333, CLSC 333, and ARTH 433.
ARTH 435	Issues in Ancient Art	3 Units	Various topics in Ancient art.  Lectures, discussions and reports. Offered as ARTH 335 and ARTH 435.
ARTH 436	Representations of War in Ancient Rome	3 Units	Few societies in history have been as militaristic as ancient Rome--or as proud of their warrior culture. This course examines the many ways that Romans constructed and contested their conceptions of war from the founding of the Roman Republic in 509 B.C.E. to the reign of Constantine (306-337 C.E.). Why did Romans choose to represent war in certain ways, and how did these artistic representations shape Romans' military values? What can the visual record tell us about how different groups (soldiers, women, slaves) experienced war in the Roman world? We will explore major public monuments in the city of Rome (including triumphal arches and the Colosseum) and private objects (such as silver drinking vessels) to observe how Roman militarism pervaded different walks of life. We will also examine monuments on the edges of Rome's empire, such as the towering trophies in modern France and Romania, to explore how works of art and architecture mediated the relationship between Romans and the peoples they conquered. Students will be encouraged to think about how art and architecture contributed to the construction of militarism as a chief Roman value, but also about how visual representations provided an important means to debate the value of Rome's military efforts, to subvert Rome's rigidly hierarchical social order, and to grapple with what it meant to "be Roman" as wars transformed Rome from a small city in Italy to a massive, pan-Mediterranean empire. After exploring Romans' conceptions of war and victory, students also may ask whether the common comparison between the Roman Empire and modern America is appropriate. Offered as ARTH 336, ARTH 436, CLSC 336 and CLSC 436. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 441	Issues in the Art of Japan	3 Units	This is a topics course.  Each offering will focus on a specific topic within the area of Japanese art.  Sample topics may include: Muromachi Hanging Scrolls, Ryoan-ji Temple Garden Architecture, Rimpa School Panel Screens, Buddhist Panting in the Edo Period.  Lectures, discussions, and reports. Offered as ARTH 341 and ARTH 441.
ARTH 444	Archaeology of the Ancient World	3 Units	This course examines the great civilizations of the ancient world, particularly those of the Ancient Near East, Egypt, Greece and Rome, through the archaeological record. Each of these geographic areas and their respective cultures will be individually explored, but also examined within a broader historical context. Particular focus will be placed on the social, political, religious, and economic ideas that were exchanged across Mesopotamia, Anatolia, the Levant and the Mediterranean and the influence this interconnectivity had on these ancient societies.  Offered as ANEE 344, ANEE 444, ANTH 344, ANTH 444, ARTH 344, ARTH 444, CLSC 344 and CLSC 444. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 449	Gothic Art: Vision and Matter	3 Units	This course will examine the development and dissemination of Gothic art in Western Europe in the High and Late Middle Ages.  We will consider a variety of media, including architecture, metalwork, sculpture, manuscript illumination, panel paintings, fresco cycles, and small devotional objects.  As we study medieval art in its socio-historical contexts--private and public, monastic and political, liturgical and lay--we will pay special attention to issues of patronage, relationships between texts and images, the introduction of visionary and mystical devotion, attitudes towards education and authority, differences between male and female piety, modes of medieval viewing, and reception and manipulation of art by medieval audiences.  Visits to the CMA will form an integral part of the course. Offered as ARTH 349 and ARTH 449. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 450	Issues in Medieval Art	3 Units	Various topics in Medieval Art. Lectures, discussions, and reports. Offered as ARTH 350 and ARTH 450.
ARTH 453	Sixteenth Century Italian Art	3 Units	The development of the High Renaissance and Mannerist styles in Italy and late 16th century trends: painting and sculpture. Offered as ARTH 353 and ARTH 453.
ARTH 454	Global Renaissance Art	3 Units	As a result of Roman Catholic missions to Africa and Asia, colonial occupation in Latin America, and mercantile trade with the Ottoman empire, European artists and patrons developed increasingly complex modes of cultural production in the early modern period.  Adopting an interdisciplinary approach that encompasses art, anthropology, history, and literature, this course reassesses the geographic parameters of the Renaissance and asks students to consider what words like "native" and "foreign" might have meant in the 15th-17th centuries. Course readings will be available on Canvas.  Requirements: a series of short, critical reflection papers; a longer 12-15 pg. research paper, and active participation in class discussions and group activities. Separate requirements will apply to graduate students. Offered as ARTH 354 and ARTH 454.
ARTH 455	The Book in the Middle Ages: The Christian, Jewish, and Islamic Tradition	3 Units	This course will examine later medieval manuscript production, paying particular attention to the issues of patronage, gender, literacy, reception, and cultural biases. We will explore the imagery and texts of monastic and courtly manuscripts, travel books and devotional manuals, all within the framework of the tightly interwoven theological and social discourses of the institutions that commissioned them. As the title of the course indicates, we will study Christian, Jewish, and Islamic books and their interrelations; for example, we will compare Islamic encyclopedias of the natural world, such as Zakariya ibn Muhammad al-Qazwini's illustrated Wonders of Creation, with medieval bestiaries, herbals, and encyclopedias such as Hartman Schedel's Liber Chronicarum and Les Merveilles du Monde. Each religious culture will receive a special close-study spotlight: Jewish Haggadot (books for the Passover Seder), Christian courtly romances, and Islamic manuscripts of the Shahnama epic. Offered as ARTH 355 and ARTH 455. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 456	Medieval Matters: The Monstrous, the Macabre, the Miraculous	3 Units	This course will explore three distinct but interrelated topics in medieval visual culture, which haunt the modern world as well. We will first study the concepts of the monsters and the monstrous in medieval Europe, as they were manifested in visual, literary, and cryptozoological production. From monster theory to monster culture, we will look at the anxieties that the monsters--those from the edges, those from within--have written on the body of medieval art. These same anxieties, rooted in the fear of difference, manifest themselves in the macabre art: the art of living death that predicated material universe of the late Middle Ages. We will explore the ghosts and the revenants, the living corpses and the nimble skeletons that populate medieval murals, manuscripts, and sculpture. All this is wrapped into the notion of the miraculous, both wondrous and dangerous at once. Here, the focus will be on female bodies, seen as monstrous, macabre, and miraculous at once. Students should be prepared to discuss these topics both within the context of medieval Europe and within our own historical moment. Offered as ARTH 356 and ARTH 456.
ARTH 457	Medieval Wonders: Monuments from Across the Globe	3 Units	This course will introduce art of the medieval world, considered globally, with a special focus on monuments surviving from the seventh to fifteenth centuries. Emphasis will be on sculpture and architecture; other media--manuscript illumination, wall paintings, ceramics, and metalwork--will be discussed in conjunction with the related sites. We will travel, virtually, to Pre-Columbian Yucatan, Judeo-Christian Europe, Islamic Spain and Central Asia, Hindu and Buddhist India, Tibet, and Southeast Asia. Each week one or two monuments will be discussed in depth, and other sites will be introduced to place it into historical and art historical contexts. Among the themes we will explore are the power relationships between sovereignty and religion; visual expressions of politics and propaganda; the ways literature, performance, and devotion informed medieval material culture; the importance of pilgrimage; and influences of international trade. Ethical and nationalist issues surrounding looting and cultural patrimony will also be discussed. Objects from CMA's permanent collections will form an integral part of the course. Each unit will end with the consideration of collecting practices. Offered as ARTH 357 and ARTH 457.
ARTH 458	Medieval Body	3 Units	This course will explore the meanings and representations of the body in western medieval culture.  Topics will include bleeding bodies, fragmented bodies, lactating bodies, labile bodies, cosmic bodies, physiological bodies, mystical bodies, suffering bodies, edible bodies, enclosed bodies, gendered bodies, Christ's bodies, Mary's bodies, decomposing bodies, macabre bodies, resurrected bodies, dead bodies, intercessory bodies, unhinging bodies, translucent bodies, martyred bodies, desirable bodies, desirous bodies, abhorrent bodies, mimetic bodies, nude bodies, marginalized bodies, defleshed bodies, social bodies, political bodies, monstrous bodies, mnemonic bodies, and deformed bodies.  We will explore the complex rhetoric of embodiment as it manifests itself in the ambiguous discourse--both medieval and contemporary--on the relationships between the material and intangible, spiritual and physical, somatic and mental, corporeal and ethereal. Offered as ARTH 358 and ARTH 458. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 460	Renaissance Art in Northern Europe	3 Units	Painting, sculpture, and the graphic arts in Belgium, France, Germany, and The Netherlands, 1400-1580, highlighting the careers and contributions of specific artists such as Jan van Eyck, Albrecht Durer, and Pieter Bruegel.  We will also analyze the changing social, cultural, religious, and political circumstances of the art made during this period, which saw the invention of printmaking, the Protestant Revolution, and increased strife between rulers and their subjects.  The rise of new subjects such as landscape and scene of everyday life will be explored, and changes in patronage will be discussed, concentrating on the shift from church and noble patronage to increasingly middle-class patronage related to the beginnings of the open art market. Offered as ARTH 360 and ARTH 460. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 461	17th-Century Art in Belgium and The Netherlands	3 Units	The arts of painting, drawing, and printmaking in Belgium and The Netherlands are discussed in relationship to political, social, cultural, and religious contexts.  We will explore the careers and production of individual artists such as Rubens, Van Dyck, Hals, Rembrandt, and Vermeer.  Developments in new subjects, artistic specialization, and the expansion of the open market are seen as important factors in shaping Belgian and Dutch art. Offered as ARTH 361 and ARTH 461. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 462	Issues in Early Modern Southern European Art	3 Units	Various topics in the art of southern Europe, 1400-1800. Lectures, discussions, reports, and gallery visits in the CMA.   Offered as ARTH 362 and ARTH 462. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 467	17th and 18th Century Art in France	3 Units	A Survey of the arts of painting, sculpture and architecture in France from 1600-1780, a period in which France became the leading political and cultural power in Europe.  We will focus on the relationship between the arts and changing social, cultural, religious and political circumstances at a time that saw the rise of the absolute state before the French Revolution, the increased use of art for political propaganda, and the burgeoning of a consumer culture in the middle class. Offered as ARTH 367 and ARTH 467. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 468	Doors Wide Shut: The Private Art Collection from Raphael to Rauschenberg	3 Units	A child's room is often stocked with marvels: bird nests, shells, shiny stones, books, and drawings. The great art collections of the Renaissance began in much the same way as these playful assemblages. From cabinets of curiosities containing treasures from foreign lands, to paintings of nude women by Titian and Raphael, these early collections marked the beginning of the modern art museum. What do the hoarding tendencies of the Jesuit Athanasius Kircher (1601-1680), founder of the `Kircherianum--a museum filled with taxidermy animals and mechanical inventions--have in common with Ronald Lauder's recent and widely publicized purchase of a Gustav Klimt painting for $135 million? Famous American art collectors of the 19th & 20th centuries like Henry Clay Frick, Isabella Stewart Gardner, and Peggy Guggenheim opened these formerly private realms of display to the public, revealing the complex motives and politics inherent to the practice of art collection. This course will focus first on the conceptual issues that informed early modern collecting in the western world, and subsequently the way that these ideas and modalities later inflected and shaped the history of modern collecting--particularly in the private sector in Europe and America. Offered as: ARTH 368 and ARTH 468. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 474	Impressionism to Symbolism	3 Units	Major developments in European painting and sculpture during the latter half of the nineteenth century. Post-impressionism synthetism, symbolism, and the arts and crafts movement considered in their socio-cultural contexts. Works of Degas, Manet, Monet, Klimt, Bocklin, Gauguin, etc. Offered as ARTH 374 and ARTH 474.
ARTH 479	Issues in 19th Century Art	3 Units	Various topics in 19th century art, with class lectures, discussions and reports. Consult department for current topic. Offered as ARTH 379 and ARTH 479.
ARTH 482	Art, Eco-criticism, and the Environment	3 Units	As issues of sustainability and environmental impact have become increasingly dominant concerns in contemporary society, eco-criticism has emerged as a vital methodological thread across the humanities.  Motivated by ethical as well as scholarly concerns, eco-criticism not only enacts a fundamental examination of nature as an ideological construct, but also seeks to investigate the complex interrelationship between humanity and the environment.  Concurrently, there has been a marked interest in studying the role of "green issues" in contemporary art, particularly in tracing the development of earth art or eco-art from the early 1970s to the present.  The goal of this seminar is to forge a link between these two emergent strands by tracing the complex relationship between art and the environment from the nineteenth-century to the present, seeking to thereby assess the capaciousness of eco-criticism as a methodological approach to art history. Offered as ARTH 382, ARTH 482 and ESTD 382. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 485	Issues in the History of Industrial Design	3 Units	One of the most momentous occurrences of the 20th and 21st Centuries has received surprisingly little attention:  the transformation in how nearly everything around us is designed and made.  Chairs, desks, pens, cars, stoves, refrigerators, printing presses, lighting fixtures, and children's toys all look very different than they did a century ago, and often are made through manufacturing process and out of materials that did not exist then.  The history of industrial design can be traced back to the 19th century, and to the writings of social reformers such as William Morris and the teachings of progressive art schools such as the Bauhaus, which introduced a machine-made look and many classic modern designs, such as the Wassily Chair by Marcel Breuer.  But the term industrial design was only coined in 1929, and modern industrial design, which brought together careful analysis of engineering, manufacturing, marketing, styling, branding and streamlining--really dates from that period through the creations of a group of pioneering, unheralded American geniuses, such as Raymond Lowie, Norman Bel Geddes, Henry Dreyfuss, Walter Dorwin Teague, Brooks Stevens, Russel Wright, Eliot Noyes, Viktor Schreckengost, and Harley Earl.  In broad strokes, this class will lay out a history of industrial design from its origins until today.  It will combine discussion of the work of historically significant figures, who established the basic framework of the field, with analysis of products being made today, by figures such as Dieter Rams, Jony Ive, and Philippe Starck.  The class will also include a tour of and introduction to the Industrial Design program of the Cleveland Institute of Art, established by the great industrial designer and artist Viktor Schreckengost in 1933.  The class will also view objects from the collections of the Western Reserve Historical Society, the Cleveland Museum of Art, and other arts institutions in the Greater Cleveland area. Offered as ARTH 385 and ARTH 485.
ARTH 486	Issues in American Art	3 Units	Various topics in American art.  Each offering will focus on a specific topic within American art.  Lectures, discussions, and report.  The course will entail regular oral classroom reports and short writing assignments as well as a final paper.  Producing an intellectually significant final paper is the major goal of the class.   Graduate students are expected to produce a final paper of greater length than Undergraduates and that shows evidence of original scholarship. Offered as ARTH 386 and ARTH 486.
ARTH 489A	M.A. Qualifying Paper	3 Units	Individual research and intensive study of a specific topic in art history that culminates in a written M.A. Qualifying Paper. Prereq: To be taken only after completion of 18 credit hours of graduate Art History coursework.
ARTH 489B	M.A. Qualifying Paper Revisions	1 Unit	Revisions of the M.A. Qualifying Paper undertaken under the supervision of both QP readers. Prereq: ARTH 489A.
ARTH 490A	Visual Arts and Museums I	3 Units	This course examines the idea of the art museum in both its historical and contemporary manifestations, focusing on the context of Western Europe and the United States.  As a result of this course, students should be familiar with the following topics: the historic development of the museum, from its origins in collecting practices to its modern incarnation as an institution; the development and care of a collection, including acquisition, cataloguing, and conservation; the display and housing of a collection, including internal and external museum architecture; the study and interpretation of the collection/exhibition, considering diverse publics; the governance of the institution, including project management, finance, and administration.  Through the study of these topics, the student should be familiar with the following concepts: the museum as a place for learning, research and scholarship and the museum as steward of cultural property and the attendant issues of ethics and the law.  ARTH 490A concentrates on museum collections and related aspects of care, research, interpretation and scholarship.  Students who successfully complete ARTH 490A and ARTH 490B may be considered for admission into ARTH 491A, a supervised internship in an art museum or gallery situation.
ARTH 490B	Visual Arts and Museums II	3 Units	This course examines the idea of the art museum in both its historical and contemporary manifestations, focusing on the context of Western Europe and the United States.  As a result of this course, students should be familiar with the following topics: the historic development of the museum, from its origins in collecting practices to its modern incarnation as an institution; the development and care of a collection, including acquisition, cataloguing, and conservation; the display and housing of a collection, including internal and external museum architecture; the study and interpretation of the collection/exhibition, considering diverse publics; the governance of the institution, including project management, finance, and administration.  Through the study of these topics, the student should be familiar with the following concepts: the museum as a place for learning, research and scholarship and the museum as steward of cultural property and the attendant issues of ethics and the law.  ARTH 490B concentrates on the museum as an institution, including physical aspects, management and governance, and as a site of learning.  The inter-connections between these broad fields and individual departments will be demonstrated and reinforced throughout the semester.  Students who successfully complete ARTH 490A and ARTH 490B may be considered for admission into ARTH 491A, a supervised internship in an art museum or gallery situation.
ARTH 491A	Visual Arts and Museums: Internship	1 Unit	First semester of required museum internship. Prereq: 490A and 490B.
ARTH 491B	Visual Arts and Museums: Internship	3 Units	Second semester of Internship sequence.  This internship focuses on the implementation of a comprehensive project that would serve a function similar to the requirement of a qualifying paper for the completion of a master's degree in art history.  It is recommended that students undertake this internship in the same division in which their first internship was situated although students may find opportunities to parlay the skills acquired in the first internship to successful advanced work in another division.  The key distinction here is that the work in ARTH 491B should build upon the expertise developed in ARTH 491A and represent a significant advance in responsibilities and skills.  By week 10 of ARTH 491A, students should begin to identify a potential project for ARTH 491B.  By the first week of the semester in which ARTH 491B is to be completed, the student must file an internship agreement form with the department that includes a brief description of the project to be completed, including a summary of the project and major milestones/time line.  In addition to working under the direct supervision of a museum mentor, the student must obtain a faculty mentor for the project and this information should be included in the internship agreement form.  Students must file a mid-term and final report describing their duties and responsibilities and a self-assessment of their performance and a final portfolio with a final version of their project as well as examples of drafts and feedback received in the course of completing the project.  Students must also keep a journal that tracks their milestones in completing their projects.  The faculty supervisor will solicit a letter of assessment from the internship supervisor immediately upon the close of the internship and in sufficient time for final grades. Prereq: ARTH 490A, ARTH 490B and ARTH 491A.
ARTH 492	Issues in 20th/21st Century Art	3 Units	Various topics in 20th/21st century art, with class lectures, discussions, and reports. Offered as ARTH 392 and ARTH 492.
ARTH 493	Contemporary Art: Critical Directions	3 Units	An examination of the directions taken by avant-garde American art and criticism in the aftermath of Abstract Expressionism.  Includes the rise and fall of modernism in the 1960s and '70s, as well as an investigation of Post-modern trends and theories. Offered as ARTH 393 and ARTH 493.
ARTH 494A	Directed Readings in Asian Art	1 - 3 Units	Directed reading.
ARTH 494B	Ancient Art	1 - 3 Units	
ARTH 494C	Medieval Art	1 - 3 Units	
ARTH 494D	Renaissance and Baroque Art	1 - 3 Units	
ARTH 494E	American Art	1 - 3 Units	
ARTH 494F	Modern Art	1 - 3 Units	
ARTH 495	Methodologies of Art History	3 Units	The study of art history as a discipline in its practical and theoretical aspects. Consideration given to research methods, style and historical context, and a critical examination of selected major art historical texts with a view to understanding traditional as well as recent approaches.  Special attention is given to art historical writing, employing selected original works in the Cleveland Museum of Art.  Required of first-year graduate students in the Ph.D. and Master's programs.
ARTH 496	Materials, Methods, and Physical Examination of Works of Art	3 Units	This foundational course will introduce students to the examination methods, terminology and goals of art conservation as it supports art historical research and practice. Students will learn about the various materials that make up different kinds of works of art, how these materials have been used, and what can be learned by the physical examination of works of art. Emphasis will be placed on understanding the uses of and results obtained with imaging techniques (such as X-radiography, infrared reflectography) and on what can be learned through the trained use of the human eye alone. While art from the western tradition, particularly from the 14th through the 21st centuries will be emphasized in class examples, comparisons will be made to objects from other global cultures. The growing field of technical art history, where the results of physical examination are used to illuminate art historical issues such as how workshops functioned, will be considered as well. Each student will research one work of art in the Cleveland Museum of Art or other local collections to understand the physical history and current condition of that object. The goal will be for students to gain an informed understanding of how to evaluate the condition of a work of art, of what options are available for conservation treatment, and of what art-historical information can be obtained through physical examination.
ARTH 497	Contemporary Art in East Asia	3 Units	This course will explore modern and contemporary art and visual culture in East Asia produced since the mid-twentieth century with a focus on major artistic movements and artists active in China, Japan, and Korea. Encountering complicated geopolitical and socioeconomic conditions in the post-war era, a series of experimental and radical artistic, cultural, and political movements have emerged in East Asia. The course will map the critical topographies of Asian art from 1945 to the 1980s through the exploration of the following: post-war art and experimental art in Japan and Korea, Chinese art during the Cultural Revolution, material culture in Japanese Mono-ha and Korean Dansaekhwa, and art of resistance in China and Korea in the 1980s. The course will also investigate contemporary Asian art and visual culture focusing on its global turn from the late 1980s. Fueled by international geopolitical change, economic boom, and the impact of globalization, art in Asia or by Asian artists has gained a high level of international visibility and taken a central position in contemporary art exhibitions and art criticism. This visual, social, and theoretical development in the recent art in Asia will be examined through key issues and themes: art's revisiting of tradition and history, its exploration of body and identity, the impact of consumerism and popular culture, and its engagement with public space and the urban environment. Offered as ARTH 397 and ARTH 497. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ARTH 512	Seminar in Ancient Art	3 Units	
ARTH 530	Byzantine Visual Culture	3 Units	This seminar will focus on various aspects of Byzantine visual culture, possibly including monumental and small-scale architecture, architectural decoration (such as mosaics and wall paintings), as well as fixed and portable objects of various materials. Examples of class subjects include "The Byzantine Cult of the Virgin Mary: Image, Ritual, Text;" and "The Agency of Monastic Visual Culture in Byzantium."
ARTH 545	Seminar in Medieval Art	3 Units	
ARTH 551	Seminar in Early Modern Southern European Art	3 Units	
ARTH 552	Seminar in Early Modern Northern European Art	3 Units	
ARTH 565	Seminar in American Art	3 Units	
ARTH 570	Seminar: 19th Century Art	3 Units	
ARTH 571	Seminar in Contemporary Art	3 Units	This graduate seminar explores various topics in contemporary art.
ARTH 601	Research in Art History	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
ARTH 610A	Advanced Visual Arts and Museums: Internship I	3 Units	First semester of the internship sequence.  The intern will work under the supervision of a museum professional to plan and execute a specific project.  The student must also obtain a faculty mentor for the project.  An internship agreement form must be filed with the department by the end of the first week of classes that includes a brief description of the project.  If it is a project to be completed in one semester, a time line should be included as well.  The intern must file a mid-term and final report describing their duties and responsibilities and a self-assessment of their performance.  A portfolio kept in the department will include the final version of their project as it stands at the end of the semester, as well as examples of drafts and any evaluation received in the course of completing the project.  The intern must also keep a journal that tracks their milestones in the execution of their project.  The faculty supervisor will solicit a letter of assessment from the museum supervisor immediately upon the close of the internship and in sufficient time to assign a final grade.
ARTH 610B	Advanced Visual Arts and Museums Internship II	3 Units	Second semester of the internship sequence.  The intern will either continue with the execution of the project begun in the first semester (ARTH 610A) or, when appropriate, undertake a new project.  The intern will work under the supervision of a museum professional, and must obtain a faculty mentor for the project.  An internship agreement form must be filed with the department by the end of the first week of classes that includes a brief description of the project.  A time line should be included as well.  The intern must file a mid-term and final report describing their duties and responsibilities and a self-assessment of their performance.  A portfolio kept in the department will include the final version of their project as it stands at the end of the semester, as well as examples of drafts and any evaluation received in the course of completing the project.  The intern must also keep a journal that tracks their milestones in the execution of their project.  The faculty supervisor will solicit a letter of assessment from the museum supervisor immediately upon the close of the internship and in sufficient time to assign a final grade. Prereq: ARTH 610A.
ARTH 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
MULI 331	Song Literature II	2 Units	This course traces the history of the art song genre, including its precursors,, major figures, trends, representative works, musical style, and poetry.  Primary focus will be on national trends in France and other countries, which may include Russia, Spain, England, the US and those in Latin America and Scandinavia. Prereq: MUHI 201.
MUAR 200	Audio Recording I	2 Units	A study of basic recording principles and systems and techniques of recording and editing. Recommended preparation: Audio recording majors only.
MUAR 201	Audio Recording II	2 Units	Further study of basic recording principles and systems with an introduction to digital recording. Recommended preparation: MUAR 200.
MUAR 202	Pro Tools Production I	2 Units	Pro Tools is the Industry standard for digital Audio Production.  This course follows the avid curriculum for Pro Tools user certification.  Requires a personal laptop computer (Mac preferred) with Pro Tools 10 and the complete production toolkit software. Prereq: Audio Recording majors only.
MUAR 203	Pro Tools Production II	2 Units	Pro Tools is the Industry standard for digital Audio Production.  This course follows the avid curriculum for Pro Tools user certification.  Requires a personal laptop computer (Mac preferred) with Pro Tools 10 and the complete production toolkit software. Prereq: MUAR 203 and Audio Major.
MUAR 250	Audio Recording for Non-Majors	2 Units	This is a hands-on course for musicians who wish to understand the processes for recording music and speech that will be beneficial to their musical careers.  Topics include microphone techniques, signal processing, delivering audio masters, computer workstations, audio software and the business of music.
MUAR 254B	Case Audio Recording Internship IV	0 Unit	
MUAR 300	Advanced Recording Techniques I	2 Units	A study of advanced microphone, recording, and monitoring systems and techniques with an emphasis on two track digital recordings of classical music and critical listening. Recommended preparation: MUAR 201.
MUAR 301	Advanced Recording Techniques II	2 Units	Further study of advanced microphone, recording, and monitoring systems and techniques, with an emphasis on two track digital recordings of large ensemble classical music. Recommended preparation: MUAR 300.
MUAR 302	Multitrack Recording Techniques I	2 Units	A study of multitrack recording and mixdown techniques. Recommended preparation: MUAR 301. Audio recording majors only.
MUAR 303	Multitrack Recording Techniques II	2 Units	Further study of multitrack recording and mixdown techniques, with an emphasis on synchronization to video. Recommended preparation: MUAR 302.
MUAR 310	Recording Studio Maintenance I	1 Unit	Study of techniques for optimizing professional recording equipment performance. Recommended preparation: MUAR 201. Audio recording majors only.
MUAR 311	Recording Studio Maintenance II	1 Unit	Study of techniques for optimizing professional recording equipment performance. Recommended preparation: MUAR 201.
MUAR 320	Acoustics of Music I	1 Unit	A seminar in the basic concepts of musical acoustics and research in this area. The students actively participate in experiments exploring various topics in musical acoustics.
MUAR 321	Acoustics of Music II	1 Unit	A seminar in the basic concepts of musical acoustics and research in this area. The students actively participate in experiments exploring various topics in musical acoustics.
MUAR 322	Recording Workshop I	1 Unit	Recording Workshop provides an increased level of hands-on intensive study of microphone placement.  Each week a different instrument or group of instruments will be available for experimentation.  Each class represents a recording session centered on a specific instrument, resulting in a comprehensive set of test recordings at the end of each semester.  These will provide the basis of reference for future recording decisions. Recommended preparation: MUAR 200.
MUAR 323	Recording Workshop II	1 Unit	Recording Workshop provides an increased level of hands-on intensive study of microphone placement.  Each week a different instrument or group of instruments will be available for experimentation.  Each class represents a recording session centered on a specific instrument, resulting in a comprehensive set of test recordings at the end of each semester.  These will provide the basis of reference for future recording decisions. Recommended preparation: MUAR 200.
MUAR 380	Junior Recording Techniques Thesis	3 Units	
MUAR 385	Recording Studio Internship	4 Units	
MUAR 390	Senior Recording Tech Thesis/Senior Capstone	6 Units	Students will originate, design, organize, and complete a project that will demonstrate and document proficiency with his/her accumulated audio recording technology skills. This project must include evidence of critical thinking, clear planning, and establishment of reasonable goals with an appropriate plan of action. There is a significant written component that requires regular submission of drafts, progress reports, evidence of project advancement, and a final written document. There must also be a public presentation of the project in a venue approved by the department. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
MUCP 200	Composition Seminar	0 Unit	
MUCP 399	Undergraduate Independent Studies	1 - 3 Units	Each student develops a topic of interest to be explored with a faculty member.
MUCP 501	Composition Independent Study	1 Unit	
MUDE 100	First Year Eurhythmics Lab	0 Unit	First-Year Eurhythmics Lab is an experience designed to provide additional support for students as they take Eurhythmics I as first-year students.  This class will allow students to review for Eurhythmics I assessments and seek clarification as needed.  Materials will be presented aurally, visually, and kinesthetically to provide an immersive rhythmic experience. Coreq: MUDE 101.
MUDE 101	Eurhythmics I	0 Unit	Physical expression of rhythm in which large bodily movements form the reference for rhythmic analysis. Study of pulse, meter, patterns, crossrhythms, improvisation, rhythmic canons, and bodily coordination emphasizing proper tension and relaxation. Recommended preparation: MUTH 003.
MUDE 102	Eurhythmics II	0 Unit	(See MUDE 101.)
MUDE 501	Special Reading (M.M. and M.A.)	1 Unit	
MUED 200A	Basic Skills and Pedagogy: Voice	2 Units	Designed for music education majors to provide the fundamentals of teaching methods for various instruments. Recommended preparation: Music education majors. Non-music majors accepted with consent of department.
MUED 200B	Basic Skills and Pedagogy: Guitar	2 Units	Designed for music education majors to provide the fundamentals of teaching methods for various instruments. Recommended preparation: Music education majors.  Non-music majors accepted with consent of department.
MUED 200C	Basic Skills and Pedagogy: Brass	2 Units	This course is designed to provide music education majors with basic skills and pedagogy in the areas of group and individual brass instruction techniques. The course will consist of two components: applied study on each brass instrument; and study/discussion of current pedagogical practices. Students need not have completed any prior music education courses prior to enrolling.
MUED 200E	Basic Skills and Pedagogy: Clarinet and Saxophone	2 Units	Designed for music education majors to provide the fundamentals of teaching methods for various instruments. Recommended preparation: Music education majors.  Non-music majors accepted with consent of department.
MUED 200F	Basic Skills and Pedagogy: Double Reeds and Flute	2 Units	Designed for music education majors to provide the fundamentals of teaching methods for various instruments. Recommended preparation: Music education majors.  Non-music majors accepted with consent of department.
MUED 200H	Basic Skills and Pedagogy: Strings	2 Units	Designed for music education majors to provide the fundamentals of teaching methods for various instruments. Recommended preparation: Music education majors.  Non-music majors accepted with consent of department.
MUED 200J	Basic Skills & Pedagogy: Piano for Music Educators	2 Units	Designed for music education majors to provide the fundamentals of using piano in the classroom for pedagogy and accompaniment. Prereq: MUED 240.
MUED 200P	Basic Skills and Pedagogy: Percussion	2 Units	Designed for music education majors to provide the fundamentals of teaching methods for various instruments. Recommended preparation: Music education majors. Non-music majors accepted with consent of department.
MUED 240	Foundations of Music Education	3 Units	An introduction to and overview of the music education profession. Philosophical, historical and psychological perspectives on music education in schools, including contemporary topics and trends. Introduction of Ohio academic content standards and curriculum model for music, along with K-12 National Music Standards. Observation of area music teachers and peer-teaching experience. Recommended preparation: Music education major or permission. A student may not receive credit for both MUED 240 and MUED 410.
MUED 275	Elements of Conducting	3 Units	This course is designed to develop the cognitive, affective and psychomotor skills necessary for students to communicate effectively with performing ensembles. Students will learn to listen, think, and communicate verbally and nonverbally through systematic exercises, in order to prepare for ensemble rehearsal and performance experiences.
MUED 276	Advanced Conducting, Score Analysis and Rehearsal Techniques	3 Units	This course is designed to continue development of the cognitive, affective and psychomotor skills necessary for students to communicate effectively with performing ensembles. Students will learn to listen, think, and communicate nonverbally through systematic exercises, in order to prepare for ensemble rehearsal and performance experiences. In addition, students will apply foundational study of musical forms to score analysis and score preparation. Students will also develop a working vocabulary of rehearsal techniques for use with instrumental and vocal ensembles. Prereq: MUED 275.
MUED 300	Intensive Field Experience	0 Unit	This course is intended for BS and MA-Licensure music education majors, and acquaints students with various teaching settings in P-12 schools in the greater Cleveland area; allows students to observe and teach with practicing music teachers; and fosters critical thinking skills related to effective teaching, lesson planning, and other elements of teaching. Offered as MUED 300 and MUED 400. Prereq: MUED 240, MUED 305, and MUED 350. Coreq: MUED 355 and (MUED 352 or MUED 353).
MUED 305	World Music in Education	3 Units	This course acquaints students with the use of world music, or multicultural music, in the music education classroom.  Students are given an overview of the history of world music within American music education, discuss topics related to world music in education, research diverse world music practices, and lead lessons based on this research.  Topics and content include: definitions of world/multicultural music; philosophical basis for world music in education; diversity in our Cleveland community; authenticity; ethnomusicology; informal/formal music learning; international perspectives; pedagogical approaches; addressing the State and National Standards through world music in education; and the development of culturally informed music pedagogy based on the study of diverse music.  Throughout the course students will become acquainted with the music of diverse cultures and people groups; these will be chosen in part based on student's own research interests.  In addition to the musical cultures chosen by students for study and presentation, the music of The Gambia, West Africa; the Caribbean; and India will be highlighted during in-class activities and lessons. Recommended preparation: MUED 240. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
MUED 310	Instrumental and Choral Arranging	3 Units	Techniques of writing and arranging for instruments of the band and orchestra and voice.  Study of scoring problems for school instrumental and vocal groups of all ages and abilities.
MUED 320	Technology Assisted Music Teaching and Learning	3 Units	Fundamental concepts and skills for using technology in music teaching and learning. This project-oriented class will develop knowledge and competencies related to electronic musical instruments, MIDI sequencing, music notation software, computer-assisted instruction, digital media, the Internet, information processing, computer systems, and lab management as they relate to music education in K-12 schools. Recommended preparation: MUED 240. Offered as MUED 320 and MUED 420.
MUED 350	General Music Methods	3 Units	General Music Methods introduces student to methods and materials for planning and implementing general music experiences for all ages, with concentration on Pre-K through sixth grade children. Topics of the course include:  multiple meanings of music for children; characteristics/needs of young children and creating a supportive learning environment; theories of music learning and teaching; learning styles and collaborative learning; assorted teaching methods, rhythm, pitch, listening, movement, performing, composing; curriculum design; technology for music instruction; multicultural music; music for exceptional children; integrating music with the arts and other curricula; motivation and classroom management; lesson planning and record keeping; developing a personal philosophy of music education; national, state, and professional standards; and assessment. Clinical/Field experiences (Clinical-all ages; Field-focus on Pre-K through elementary) required.
MUED 352	Instrumental Methods and Materials	3 Units	This course acquaints students with effective ways to develop, organize and maintain a successful instrumental program for any age group, based on a comprehensive instrumental music education model.  Students are given a "womb to tomb" view of the instrumentalists' development, including physiological development and age appropriate instrumental exceptions. Topics and content include: philosophical basis for music education, considerations for selecting repertoire including multicultural music; rehearsal techniques; assessment and record keeping; planning for the rehearsal; recruitment, auditioning, and placement; motivation and classroom management; team teaching and collaborative learning; managing an instrumental program; participation in professional activities; effective use of technology in the instrumental program; philosophy; and national, state, and professional standards.  Clinical/Field experiences (all ages) required.
MUED 353	Choral Methods and Materials	3 Units	This course acquaints students with effective ways to develop, organize and maintain a successful choral program for any age group, based on a comprehensive choral music education model. Students review fundamental vocal pedagogy of the singing voice, including physiological development, age appropriate vocal expectations, and establishing and maintaining vocal health. Topics include: philosophical basis for vocal music education; the child voice, the adolescent voice, and the adult voice; vocal tone; considerations for selecting repertoire including ensemble assessment, music evaluation, and multicultural music; rehearsal techniques, collaborative learning, and motivation; planning for the rehearsal; developing conducting technique; recruitment, auditioning, placement, score analysis and preparation; classroom management; managing a choral program; participation in professional activities; effective use of technology in a choral program; and national state, and professional standards. Clinical/Field experiences (all ages) required. Recommended preparation: MUED 276.
MUED 355	Vernacular Music in Education	3 Units	This Music Education Department Seminar brings together all strands of the Music Education program by focusing on curriculum as the organizational element of instruction.  Topics and content include: understanding the issues presented by special learners; techniques for integrating special learners into the music teaching environment; developing learning outcomes; designing instruction; planning classroom experiences; defining assessment and measurement; assessment techniques and instruments for the music classroom; and exploring elements of school music program organization and administration.  Professional writing and clinical and field experiences will be a large part of the activities in this course.  This course is presented in a seminar format that provides for discussions of classroom topics and commentary on field experiences. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
MUED 391	Music in Early Childhood	3 Units	The goal of the course is to provide students with an understanding of the role of music in early childhood and approaches to music education with young children.  Students will experience an overview of selected theories of musical development of young children, discuss the importance of music to various areas of child development, explore cultural perspectives and influences on musical development, evaluate curricular materials and methods used in early childhood music education, observe children's music making in early childhood classrooms, and develop teaching skills for early childhood music settings.  Topics and content of this course include: music's role in early childhood development; music aptitude and its measurement; theories of early childhood music learning; early childhood making; evaluating curricular materials for early childhood music; the importance of play in early childhood musical development; incorporating State and National Music Education Standards; designing instruction for early childhood music settings; assessment in early childhood music; cultural perspectives on music in early childhood; cultural influences on musical development; music therapy with young children; benefits of family interaction in music; the role of listening in early childhood musical development; and formal music instruction with young children  The class will participate in a weekly service learning project providing music instruction for young children and parents or caregivers from an underserved population. Offered as MUED 391 and MUED 491.
MUED 396A	Student Teaching in Music Education	9 Units	Teaching music in both elementary and secondary schools, full-time five days a week for 15 weeks.  Closely supervised field experiences of all types with a wide variety of students. Emphasis on planning lessons and organizing materials, teaching methodologies, motivation, and student assessment. Topics addressed include communications and the arts, technology in learning, interdisciplinary learning, collaborative learning and teaching, creating a supportive environment, and professional development.  Development of skills needed for self-assessment as well as student assessment. Clinical/Field experiences (all ages) required. Recommended preparation: Concurrent enrollment in MUED 396B. Offered as MUED 396A and MUED 496A. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: EDUC 255 and MUAP 323 and MUAP 35.
MUED 396B	Student Teaching Seminar in Music Education	3 Units	This is the SAGES Senior Capstone requirement for students majoring in Music Education. Taken at the same time as the student teaching experience (MUED 396A/496A), this seminar will guide students through preparation for entering the professional world of music education, and mentor them in their preparation of their Senior Capstone Project and Presentation.  Recommended preparation: Concurrent enrollment in MUED 496A. Offered as MUED 396B and MUED 496B. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
MUED 399	Undergraduate Independent Studies	1 - 3 Units	Each student develops a topic of interest to be explored with a faculty member.
MUED 400	Intensive Field Experience	0 Unit	This course is intended for BS and MA-Licensure music education majors, and acquaints students with various teaching settings in P-12 schools in the greater Cleveland area; allows students to observe and teach with practicing music teachers; and fosters critical thinking skills related to effective teaching, lesson planning, and other elements of teaching. Offered as MUED 300 and MUED 400. Prereq: MUED 305, MUED 350, and MUED 410. Coreq: MUED 355 and (MUED 352 or MUED 353).
MUED 410	Professional Music Education: A Career Introduction	1 Unit	The role of a Music Educator is complex and involves the practical application of music content in various Pre K-12 teaching environments. This course is designed for entering Master of Arts with Teaching License majors who have a performance-based undergraduate education to give a comprehensive overview of the profession and facilitate the journey and transition from music student to professional music educator.  Admission into the Master of Arts with Teacher License Music Education Program is a prerequisite for this course.  A student may not receive credit for both MUED 240 and MUED 410. Prereq: Admission into the Master of Arts with Teacher License Music Education Program.
MUED 420	Technology Assisted Music Teaching and Learning	3 Units	Fundamental concepts and skills for using technology in music teaching and learning. This project-oriented class will develop knowledge and competencies related to electronic musical instruments, MIDI sequencing, music notation software, computer-assisted instruction, digital media, the Internet, information processing, computer systems, and lab management as they relate to music education in K-12 schools. Recommended preparation: MUED 240. Offered as MUED 320 and MUED 420.
MUED 440	Scholarship in Music Education	3 Units	In MUED 440 we will be examining critically the research of others. We will explore the various paradigms and methods in music education research and will learn to become educated consumers of published research. In addition, we will be learning the beginnings of how to conduct our own research. Specific topics of this course include utilizing music education research tools, resources, and materials; identifying and generating research problems; reviewing related literature; designing research procedures; conducting quantitative and qualitative research studies; and writing empirical research reports and proposals. Writing skills are an important part of this course, for unless one can convey the findings of his or her research to other people with clarity, that research will be of limited value. Prereq: Graduate Student in Music Education.
MUED 441	Philosophical Foundations of Music Education	3 Units	In this course, students explore major aesthetic philosophies that have influenced contemporary music education, and discuss current issues central to our field. Among topics included: basic views about art/music; creating art/music; meaning in art/music, experiencing art/music; music and aesthetic education; criticism in music; multicultural music; and critical theories and inquiry regarding music education.  Students are asked to assess their own roles in music education, as well as their obligations and potential capacities for leadership in the profession.  Students will work toward development of a personal professional philosophy of music education.
MUED 442	Curriculum and Assessment in Music Education	3 Units	This course is designed to give graduate music education students thorough knowledge of the overarching role of curriculum and assessment as the organizational elements of instruction.  In depth coverage of such topics as: the role of assessment and measurement in teaching; epistemology; scope and sequence; backward design; instructional goals; validity; reliability; performance assessments; measuring assessment; curriculum design; and teaching for understanding.  These concepts and procedures will be explored in depth to give daily music instruction a global framework in the larger organizational structure of profession, state, national, and accreditation standards for P-12 and college music settings.
MUED 443	Music Cognition and Learning	3 Units	Survey and critical review of the literature as it relates to music teaching and learning, and music performance. Specific topics may include basic psychoacoustical processes, auditory perception, cognitive organization of musical sound, tonal and musical memory, neuromusical research, affective and physiological responses to music, learning theory, musical aptitude, developmental processes, and motivation.
MUED 446	Sociology of Music Education	3 Units	In this course, students explore philosophical, social, cultural, and theoretical issues regularly encountered by music educators in classroom and rehearsal settings.  Topics covered include: local, state, and national issues and policies intersecting with music education; social challenges and classroom realities facing music educators; social and cultural diversity issues in music education; and the role(s) of music education in society. Prereq: MUED 440.
MUED 447	Seminar in College Music Teaching	3 Units	Seminar in College Music Teaching is a course to help prepare CWRU and CIM music graduate students for careers in university teaching. This course includes information on creating class syllabi, assessing students, interviewing for college jobs, and understanding the university ecosystem. Coursework will be tailored to meet the needs and goals of each graduate student, regardless of content area. Perspectives will be drawn from music education, applied music, musicology, conducting, music theory, and music technology. Prereq: Graduate music student at CWRU and CIM.
MUED 450	Special Topics in Music Education	3 Units	Close study of a theme or aspect of music education, such as brain development in music education, biomechanics and music, gender studies in music education, and gerontology and music learning.
MUED 491	Music in Early Childhood	3 Units	The goal of the course is to provide students with an understanding of the role of music in early childhood and approaches to music education with young children.  Students will experience an overview of selected theories of musical development of young children, discuss the importance of music to various areas of child development, explore cultural perspectives and influences on musical development, evaluate curricular materials and methods used in early childhood music education, observe children's music making in early childhood classrooms, and develop teaching skills for early childhood music settings.  Topics and content of this course include: music's role in early childhood development; music aptitude and its measurement; theories of early childhood music learning; early childhood making; evaluating curricular materials for early childhood music; the importance of play in early childhood musical development; incorporating State and National Music Education Standards; designing instruction for early childhood music settings; assessment in early childhood music; cultural perspectives on music in early childhood; cultural influences on musical development; music therapy with young children; benefits of family interaction in music; the role of listening in early childhood musical development; and formal music instruction with young children  The class will participate in a weekly service learning project providing music instruction for young children and parents or caregivers from an underserved population. Offered as MUED 391 and MUED 491.
MUED 496A	Student Teaching in Music Education	9 Units	Teaching music in both elementary and secondary schools, full-time five days a week for 15 weeks.  Closely supervised field experiences of all types with a wide variety of students. Emphasis on planning lessons and organizing materials, teaching methodologies, motivation, and student assessment. Topics addressed include communications and the arts, technology in learning, interdisciplinary learning, collaborative learning and teaching, creating a supportive environment, and professional development.  Development of skills needed for self-assessment as well as student assessment. Clinical/Field experiences (all ages) required. Recommended preparation: Concurrent enrollment in MUED 396B. Offered as MUED 396A and MUED 496A. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: EDUC 255.
MUED 496B	Student Teaching Seminar in Music Education	3 Units	This is the SAGES Senior Capstone requirement for students majoring in Music Education. Taken at the same time as the student teaching experience (MUED 396A/496A), this seminar will guide students through preparation for entering the professional world of music education, and mentor them in their preparation of their Senior Capstone Project and Presentation.  Recommended preparation: Concurrent enrollment in MUED 496A. Offered as MUED 396B and MUED 496B. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
MUED 501	Special Reading (M.A. and M.M.)	1 - 18 Units	
MUED 590	Seminar in Music Education	3 Units	This seminar is designed for music education doctoral students to pursue advanced research methodologies and procedures. Topics might include meta-analysis, multiple regression, advanced qualitative coding, and mixed methods research.
MUED 601	Special Readings (Ph.D./D.M.A.)	1 - 18 Units	
MUED 640	Qualitative Research in Music Education	3 Units	This course provides music education graduate students with an in-depth look at qualitative research techniques in educational settings, along with an emphasis on design and analysis, and a critical review of selected research studies in music education. The goals of this class include gaining an understanding of the qualitative research paradigm, learning to write effectively and efficiently as a qualitative researcher, and conducting a small-scale qualitative research project. Prereq: Graduate Music Education major and MUED 440 or requisites not met permission.
MUED 641	Quantitative Research Methods in Music Education	3 Units	Effective educators of all levels are expected to continually refine their knowledge of how students best learn music in practical applications through assimilation of current research.  Implementation of research findings in one's classroom, as well as contributions back to the profession through scholarship, should remain a priority.  Quantitative Research Methods will explore fundamentals of research design and appropriate statistical methods for interpretation of data.  Specific topics will include: identification of research issues, selection of appropriate experimental designs for investigation, application of statistical methods for data interpretation, and evaluation of available research.  Effective and efficient skills in writing and presentation will be expected and reinforced in all course activities. Prereq: MUED 440.
MUED 650	Fieldwork and Advanced Qualitative Analysis in Music Education	3 Units	This course provides graduate students interested in music education research with an advanced work on fieldwork and analysis technique for qualitative research in educational setting, and a critical review of selected research studies within and beyond music education. The three main goals of this class are (1) to critique qualitative research paradigm in music education; (2) to learn to conduct data analysis for grounded theory, phenomenology, and narrative inquiry; and (3) to prepare a research proposal for one of the three methodologies listed in point 2. With these perspectives, students will be better prepared to understand qualitative research in music education, evaluate research, and know how to use it in their classrooms. Prereq: MUED 640 or Requisites Not Met permission.
MUED 651	Thesis (M.A. and M.M.)	1 - 6 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
MUED 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
MUEN 324	Case Percussion Ensemble	0 - 1 Units	The Case Percussion Ensemble is open to all interested Case-affiliated individuals who seek to continue their musical development by performing percussion ensemble literature.  Membership is contingent on an audition that demonstrates moderate percussion ability and the ability to read music.  Audition materials can be acquired through the director. Recommended preparation: Audition required. Coreq: MUEN 383.
MUEN 355	Miscellaneous Ensembles	0 - 2 Units	
MUEN 370	Popular Music Ensemble	0 - 1 Units	The Popular Music Ensemble at Case Western rehearses and performs a wide range of non-jazz popular music styles.  Repertoire is usually suggested by students and chosen in collaboration with the instructor.  Current popular music of the United States has tended to be favored, but the ensemble has also worked on music that originated as much as several decades ago.  The group's instrumentation is typically drums, bass, guitars, keyboard, and a number of vocalists.  Occasionally original material is brought into the repertoire.
MUEN 371A	Klezmer Music Ensemble	0 Unit	The Klezmer Music Ensemble is dedicated to learning and performing traditional East European Jewish folk music (Klezmer Music). This important genre of world music involves a specialized performance style, a unique repertoire, and chamber-music interaction. Classes will consist of two-hour sessions (once a week) culminating with a performance to be scheduled at the end of the semester. The ensemble is open by audition to all CWRU and CIM instrumentalists and vocalists.
MUEN 371B	Klezmer Music Ensemble	1 Unit	The Klezmer Music Ensemble is dedicated to learning and performing traditional East European Jewish folk music (Klezmer Music). This important genre of world music involves a specialized performance style, a unique repertoire, and chamber-music interaction. Classes will consist of two-hour sessions (once a week) culminating with a performance to be scheduled at the end of the semester. The ensemble is open by audition to all CWRU and CIM instrumentalists and vocalists.
MUEN 373	Jazz Ensemble I	0 - 1 Units	Recommended preparation: Audition required.
MUEN 374	Jazz Ensemble II	0 - 1 Units	
MUEN 380A	Case Men's Glee Club	0 Unit	Case Mens Glee Club is a lower voice choral ensemble open to all students enrolled in the University who enjoy singing. The ensemble performs a wide variety of accompanied and a cappella repertoire written specifically for tenor, baritone, and bass voices. The ability to read music is not required for participation and there is no formal audition. The director will lead members in exercises to ensure everyone is singing the appropriate voice part. Goals of the Case Mens Glee Club include developing basic musicianship skills, learning healthy singing habits, and enjoying sharing music with fellow singers and the community.
MUEN 380B	Case Men's Glee Club	1 Unit	Case Mens Glee Club is a lower voice choral ensemble open to all students enrolled in the University who enjoy singing. The ensemble performs a wide variety of accompanied and a cappella repertoire written specifically for tenor, baritone, and bass voices. The ability to read music is not required for participation and there is no formal audition. The director will lead members in exercises to ensure everyone is singing the appropriate voice part. Goals of the Case Mens Glee Club include developing basic musicianship skills, learning healthy singing habits, and enjoying sharing music with fellow singers and the community.
MUEN 382	Case Concert Choir	0 - 1 Units	Case Concert Choir is open to any undergraduate or graduate student by audition. The ensemble performs both a cappella and accompanied choral music from a variety of time periods and genres. Concert Choir members have the opportunity to perform choral-orchestral repertoire through collaborations with the Case University Circle Orchestra and our other University Circle neighbors. The ensemble maintains a tradition of excellence in performance, strives to improve group and individual musicianship skills, and fosters community building. Recommended preparation: Audition required.
MUEN 383	Symphonic Winds	0 - 1 Units	Performance of advanced symphonic band repertoire. Open to all Case students, faculty and staff. Audition required for part placement only.
MUEN 384	Spartan Marching Band	0 - 1 Units	
MUEN 385	Case/University Circle Orchestra	0 - 1 Units	The orchestra is comprised of Case students, faculty, staff and community players who play strings, woodwinds, brass and percussion. Recommended preparation: Audition required.
MUEN 386	Case Camerata Chamber Orchestra	0 - 1 Units	This chamber string ensemble is open to all interested Case affiliated individuals who seek to continue their music development by performing orchestral literature.  Each person is required to audition to determine initial placement, section assignment, and seating.  All members are required to perform a minimum of 2 concerts per academic year. Recommended preparation: Audition required.
MUEN 387	University Singers	0 - 1 Units	University Singers is open to all students enrolled in the University who enjoy singing. The ensemble performs a wide variety of accompanied and a cappella repertoire. The ability to read music is not required for participation and no audition is necessary. Students must be able to match pitch and can expect to sing for the conductor to determine their appropriate vocal parts. Goals of the University Singers include developing basic musicianship skills, learning to sing safely and efficiently, and enjoying sharing music with fellow singers and the community.
MUEN 388A	University Chorale	0 Unit	University Chorale is a treble vocal ensemble open to all students enrolled in the University who enjoy singing. The ensemble performs a wide variety of accompanied and a cappella repertoire written specifically for treble voices. The ability to read music is not required for participation and there is no formal audition. The director will lead members in exercises to ensure everyone is singing the appropriate voice part. Goals of the University Chorale include developing basic musicianship skills, learning healthy singing habits, and enjoying sharing music with fellow singers and the community.
MUEN 388B	University Chorale	1 Unit	University Chorale is a treble vocal ensemble open to all students enrolled in the University who enjoy singing. The ensemble performs a wide variety of accompanied and a cappella repertoire written specifically for treble voices. The ability to read music is not required for participation and there is no formal audition. The director will lead members in exercises to ensure everyone is singing the appropriate voice part. Goals of the University Chorale include developing basic musicianship skills, learning healthy singing habits, and enjoying sharing music with fellow singers and the community.
MUEN 389	Keyboard Ensemble	0 - 1 Units	Keyboard Ensemble is designed for music majors whose primary instrument is piano. The format involves coaching of in-class performances of solo literature, piano duets, and collaborative piano genres by enrolled students, as well as written and spoken presentations focusing on keyboard history, literature, and performance critique. The course meets once per week. It is highly recommended that students be concurrently enrolled in applied lessons. Non-majors who are pianists and majors whose primary instrument is not piano may enroll with instructor permission following a successful audition.
MUEN 393	Baroque Chamber Ensembles	0 - 1 Units	Designed for students interested in exploring baroque music in a chamber setting on historical instruments. Prereq: Audition required.
MUEN 394	Baroque Dance Ensemble	0 - 1 Units	This course allows musicians and dancers alike to explore historical dance steps and notation.  History of dance and its relationships to music will be emphasized as students learn and perform historical dances. Prereq: MUHI 342 or MUHI 442 or permission of Instructor.
MUEN 395	Collegium Musicum	0 - 1 Units	Recommended preparation: Audition required.
MUEN 396	Early Music Singers	0 - 1 Units	Recommended preparation: Audition required.
MUEN 397	Baroque Orchestra	0 - 1 Units	Recommended preparation: Audition required.
MUGN 201	Introduction to Music: Listening Experience I	3 Units	A flexible approach to the study of the materials and literature of music. Aural and analytical skills primarily for classical music.
MUGN 212	History of Rock and Roll	3 Units	This course surveys the musical practices of the rock and roll era, broadly defined to include much popular music since the 1950s.  Music majors are to enroll in MUHI 312. Offered as AFST 212 and MUGN 212. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: For Non-Music Majors only.
MUGN 220	Composers of the Musical on Stage and Screen	3 Units	This course is meant to provide students with an introduction to the role of music in the history, reception, and popularity of the Broadway and Hollywood musical, with a particular focus on the creators--the composers, lyricists, and orchestrators. We will survey the early history, going back to 19th century experiments, revues, and the origins of the "book" musical, going through the golden age of the 1930s to the 1950s, the nadir of output in the 1960s and 1970s (Oh, Calcutta!, anyone?), the revival in the 1980s with the rise of the megamusical, all the way to today's rock-music driven puppet extravaganzas. Classes will also discuss ever-shifting genres and styles of music, new approaches to songwriting, and changes to what qualifies as "acceptable" music. There's also the structure of the stories to consider, as well as gender roles, racial stereotypes, ethnic under/overtones, and camp.
MUGN 294	Stage Movement for Opera I	1 Unit	
MUGN 296	Acting Technique I	1 Unit	
MUGN 297	Acting Techniques for Singers II	1 Unit	
MUGN 298	Opera Role Preparation	1 Unit	
MUGN 308	Digital Music: Composition and Production	3 Units	Course focuses on digital music creation and composition using audio sequencing software.  Topics include song writing, synthesizers, recording, editing, mixing, and film scoring.  Course is open to music majors, minors, and non-majors with sufficient musical background.   Emphasis on group work, creativity, and imagination.  All work done on Macintosh computers in The Core, the Department of Music's multimedia classroom.
MUGN 310	Russian Song	1 Unit	The Russian Song course is dedicated to the exploration and performance of vocal music from Russia and the former USSR. Russia comprises many ethnic groups and has a vast repertoire of folk music, folk instruments, and singing styles.  Students will learn children's songs, art songs, "city" romances, Cossack songs, Georgian polyphony and folk dances. Each song is placed in context, with an eye towards culture, symbolism, history, poetry/lyrics, and customs. Students will look at how classical composers use Russian folk music in their long forms. The study of Chastushki, an ancient Russian village phenomenon which continues to evolve, will lead to creating students' own stylistically appropriate poetry and ostinato. Russian percussion and other instruments will enhance the song and dance, all culminating in a final performance at the end of the semester. Offered as RUSN 305 and MUGN 310.
MUGN 324	Applied Diction: French	1 Unit	Intended for undergraduate/graduate voice and collaborative piano majors with insufficient background in the fundamental rules of French pronunciation and the International Phonetic Alphabet. Prereq: MUGN 321.
MUGN 370	Intro to Improvisation	1 Unit	
MUGN 399	Undergraduate Independent Studies	1 - 3 Units	Each student develops a topic of interest to be explored with a faculty member.
MUGN 651	Thesis: (M.A. and M.M.)	1 - 6 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
MUGN 751	Recital Document I-D.M.A.	1 - 3 Units	
MUPD 399	Undergraduate Independent Studies	1 - 3 Units	Each student develops a topic of interest to be explored with a faculty member.
MUPD 501	Special Reading (M.A. and M.M.)	1 - 18 Units	
MURP 310	Trumpet Repertoire	1 Unit	
MURP 311	Horn Repertoire Class	1 Unit	
MURP 317	Flute Repertoire Class	1 Unit	
MUSP 101	Keyboard Skills I	1 Unit	Keyboard Skills class is designed to build basic keyboard skills and musicianship and to provide the necessary skills for using the keyboard as a tool within one's musical studies and profession.  Emphasis on reading, technique and study of solo and ensemble repertoire.
MUSP 102	Keyboard Skills II	1 Unit	Keyboard Skills class is designed to build basic keyboard skills and musicianship and to provide the necessary skills for using the keyboard as a tool within one's musical studies and profession.  Emphasis on reading, technique and study of solo and ensemble repertoire.
MUSP 103	Keyboard Skills III	1 Unit	Keyboard Skills class is designed to build basic keyboard skills and musicianship and to provide the necessary skills for using the keyboard as a tool within one's musical studies and profession.  Emphasis on reading, technique and study of solo and ensemble repertoire.
MUSP 104	Keyboard Skills IV	1 Unit	Keyboard Skills class is designed to build basic keyboard skills and musicianship and to provide the necessary skills for using the keyboard as a tool within one's musical studies and profession.  Emphasis on reading, technique and study of solo and ensemble repertoire.
ASIA 132	Introduction to Modern East Asia	3 Units	HSTY 132 is an introduction to the histories of modern China, Japan, Korea, and Vietnam from the "dawn of the global world" in the 17th century to present. Taken together these regions make up the geographic and cultural unit commonly referred to as "East Asia." Over the course of the term, we will investigate the usefulness of this concept of "East Asia" by examining its origins as well as the sometimes convergent, sometimes divergent relations between this region and the rest of the world. We will also challenge the stereotype of a monolithic and static East Asia and see to develop a critical understanding of the internal and external forces integrating and dividing this region. We will examine how international diplomatic, commercial, military, religious, and cultural relationships shaped the individual countries as well as their relationships with each other and the world.   The course sweeps over large regions of time and space. It aims to put the contemporary discussion of globalization into historical perspective by examining the long-lasting interactions of East Asian countries with each other and the rest of the world. These connections were economic, political, cultural, and psychological. Topics include: global silver and trade flows, warfare and military technology, imperial domination and revolutionary resistance, and the role of historical memory, as in Nanking or Hiroshima. Sources include historical documents, pictures, films, and memoirs.  As we move through the course material our goal is not to gain total knowledge of modern East Asia, nor of China, Japan, Korea nor Vietnam.  Rather, by the end of the term you should be able to identify some of the main organizing themes in modern East Asian history and develop a greater understanding of the construction and nature of historical knowledge itself. Offered as HSTY 132 and ASIA 132. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ASIA 288	Imperial China: The Great Qing	3 Units	This course is an introduction to the history of Imperial China, from the fall of the Ming Dynasty in 1644 to the creation of the Chinese republic in 1912.  We will explore the major historical transformations (political, economic, social, and cultural) of the last imperial dynasty, the Qing (1644-1911), and develop an understanding of the major social, political, economic, and intellectual cultural forces shaping the formation of modern China.  Contrary to commonly-held ideas in both West and in China that traditional Chinese society was timeless or stagnant, historians now see dramatic and significant changes during this period--to the economy, to gender relations, to religion, and to many other aspects of life.  This course surveys the social, political, economic, and cultural history of this era, with emphasis on recent research.  The main goals of the course will be to acquaint students with the key changes and to show the interplay between economic, social, and cultural changes on the one hand and political developments on the other.  By the end of the semester you should have a good sense of how Chinese society was transformed over the course of the 17th through early 20th centuries.  The topics we will discuss include urbanization and commerce; gender, family and kinship; education and the examination system; opium and free trade; and ethnicity and nationalism. Offered as ASIA 288 and HSTY 288. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ASIA 289	Reform, Revolution, Republics: China 1895 to Present	3 Units	Completes a two-term sequence of the Chinese history survey, although HSTY 288 is not a prerequisite for this course.  Beginning with the First Sino-Japanese War (1895), we review the historical development of intellectual discourse, public reaction, and political protest in later Imperial China through the creation of the People's Republic in 1949 forward to contemporary times.  In contrast to the conventional description of China from a Western point of view, this course tries to explain the emergence of modern China in the context of its intellectual, political, and socio-economic transformation as experienced by Chinese in the late 19th and into the 20th century.  By discussing the influence of the West, domestic rebellions, and political radicalism, we examine how the Chinese state and society interacted in search for modernization and reforms, how these reforms were continued during the Republican period, and to what extent historical patterns can be identified in China's present-day development. Offered as ASIA 289 and HSTY 289. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ASIA 320	Chinese Popular Culture	3 Units	In this course we are going to study Chinese (including Mainland China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Chinese Diaspora) popular culture since the 1980s. By examining different forms of popular culture, including popular literature, film, music, TV programs, posters, the Internet, etc., we will be looking into their political, ideological, sociological, cultural, and psychological mechanisms. The film viewing will take place outside the class. Offered as: CHIN 320, ASIA 320 and WLIT 320. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ASIA 330	Chinese Cinema	3 Units	This course is an exploration to the history of and critical issues in Chinese cinema: we will discuss early film making in Shanghai, leftist melodrama, Socialist films, the Chinese New Wave, underground films, the film making in the era of globalization, and etc. Themes and genres that will be investigated include melodrama, the "Fifth Generation", underground film making, filmic representations of women, minority films, and historical epics. Films from mainland China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and diasporic communities will be discussed to illuminate what it means to be "Chinese."  All of the films in this course come with English subtitles; the film viewing will take place outside the class. Offered as CHIN 330 and ASIA 330. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ASIA 398	Honors Thesis	1 - 4 Units	Intensive study of a topic or problem under the direction of a faculty member, resulting in the preparation of an honors thesis.
ASIA 399	Independent Study	1 - 3 Units	Tutorial in Asian Studies.
MUTH 101	Theory and Aural Skills I	4 Units	An investigation of common-practice tonality through written exercises, keyboard work, ear training, and sight singing. MUTH 101 contains four components: (1) written work emphasizing topics such as key signatures, scales, intervals, triad and seventh chord construction, voice leading, and harmonic analysis; (2) keyboard exercises that complement theoretical studies, including scales, folk melody accompaniment, chorale harmonization, and figured bass; (3) ear training consisting of various types of dictation and listening exercises; and (4) sight singing with an emphasis on diatonic materials.  Placement by examination.
MUTH 101I	Intensive Theory and Aural Skills 1	4 Units	An investigation of common-practice tonality through written exercises, keyboard work, ear training, and sight singing. MUTH 101I contains four components: (1) written work emphasizing topics such as key signatures, scales, intervals, triad and seventh chord construction, voice leading, and harmonic analysis; (2) keyboard exercises that complement theoretical studies, including scales, folk melody accompaniment, chorale harmonization, and figured bass; (3) ear training consisting of various types of dictation and listening exercises; and (4) sight singing with an emphasis on diatonic materials. This course includes a required Lab component. Each day students will meet for 20 minutes to drill the written and skills material covered in MUTH 101I.  Placement by examination.
MUTH 102	Theory and Aural Skills II	4 Units	An investigation of common-practice tonality through written exercises, keyboard work, ear training, and sight singing. MUTH 102 contains four components: (1) written exercises including voice leading and analysis of topics including nondominant seventh chords, harmonic sequences, and tonicization; (2) keyboard exercises that complement theoretical studies, including harmonic progressions, folk melody accompaniment, chorale harmonization, and figured bass realization; (3) ear training consisting of various types of dictation and listening exercises; and (4) sight singing with an emphasis on advanced diatonic and beginning chromatic materials. Prereq: MUTH 101 or MUTH 101I or placement by examination.
MUTH 103	Theory I	3 Units	Music theory for the nonmusic major. Intervals, scales, rhythmic drill, sight singing, eartraining, keyboard work, and harmony through inversions of triads and seventh chords. Not open to music majors.
MUTH 104	Theory II	3 Units	(See MUTH 103.) Recommended preparation: MUTH 103 or consent of department.
MUTH 201	Theory and Aural Skills III	4 Units	An investigation of common-practice tonality through written exercises, keyboard work, ear training, and sight singing. MUTH 201 contains four components: (1) written exercises including voice leading and analysis of topics including tonicization, modulation, mixture, and the Neapolitan chord; (2) keyboard exercises that complement theoretical studies, including modulatory progressions, folk melody accompaniment, chorale harmonization, and figured bass realization; (3) ear training consisting of harmonic dictation and listening exercises; and (4) sight singing with an emphasis on chromatic materials. Prereq: MUTH 102 or placement by exam.
MUTH 202	Harmony-Keyboard IV	4 Units	(See MUTH 201.) Recommended preparation: MUTH 102 or placement examination.
MUTH 312	Eighteenth Century Counterpoint	3 Units	Analysis and writing of inventions in two parts, and fugues in three and four parts. Recommended preparation: MUTH 202 or MUTH 206.
MUTH 319	Jazz Skills	3 Units	This class is designed to teach students basic skills in jazz improvisation, jazz keyboard, arranging/composition and pedagogy.  Basic theory is required.  Students will eventually arrange their own composition for big band, which will feature them as the improvising soloist. Prereq: MUTH 102 or MUTH 104.
MUTH 320	Form and Analysis	3 Units	Aural and visual analysis of structural and stylistic features of 16th through 20th century music. Prereq: MUTH 202 or MUTH 208.
MUTH 390	Music Theory Literature Review	2 Units	
MUTH 399	Undergraduate Independent Studies	1 - 3 Units	Each student develops a topic of interest to be explored with a faculty member.
MUTH 416	Pre-common Practice Theory and Analysis	3 Units	An exploration of treatises and analytical methods appropriate to music of the Medieval and Renaissance eras.
MUTH 422	Musical Analysis for Educators	3 Units	Musical Analysis for Educators is designed to strengthen the analysis skills of music educators and explore practical application of these skills. Recommended preparation: Placement exam.
MUTH 423	Analysis of Musical Styles	3 Units	Analysis of selected musical compositions from various periods of the common practice era. Emphasis on traditional structures, stylistic features, and the relationship of analysis and performance.
MUTH 424	Introduction to Schenkerian Analysis	3 Units	An introduction to the theories of Heinrich Schenker and their application to the analysis of tonal music.  Intensive analytical work and selected readings. Recommended preparation: MUTH 400A competency.
MUTH 461	Theory Pedagogy	3 Units	Principles of the teaching of theory at all levels, with examination and appraisal of teaching methods, textbooks, recent concepts, etc.
NEUR 166	Explorations in Neuroscience	1 Unit	This survey course provides students with an opportunity to learn about some of the most exciting and timely concepts in neuroscience, including topics in basic and translational research, as well as perspectives on neuroscience as a profession, through a series of 14 lectures given by members of the Neurosciences Department in the Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine. Topics are presented in a way that can be understood by students who have taken a high school biology class. Every effort is made to explain any new concepts that are included in the lectures. Each lecturer will provide general background reading material for the topics they discuss.
NEUR 201	Fundamentals of Neuroscience I	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to provide students with a systematic and comprehensive introduction to the field of neuroscience. The topics that will be discussed and the level at which they are discussed assumes that the students have a basic familiarity with general features of cell structure and function and specialized properties of cells found in different physiological systems, from their previous biology coursework. The course will also provide a foundation for elective upper-level courses in the undergraduate neuroscience curriculum. Prereq: BIOL 214 and BIOL 215. Prereq or Coreq: BIOL 216.
NEUR 202	Fundamentals of Neuroscience II	3 Units	This course is the second in a sequence and designed to provide students with an understanding of signaling mechanisms that are utilized by nerve cells, including mechanisms that are responsible for signaling within cells and mechanisms that underlie signaling between cells. These mechanisms will range from the fast, millisecond time-scale transitions of ion channels that contribute to action potentials and synaptic signaling, to slower events that underlie modulation of channel activity and neurotransmitter synthesis and degradation, to even slower events on the hour and day timescale involving changes in gene expression and protein synthesis that underlie phenotypic development and neural plasticity. Prereq: NEUR 201.
NEUR 301	Biological Mechanisms of Brain Disorders	3 Units	This course is designed to introduce students to a broad range of neurological and neuropsychiatric diseases and disorders in order to understand how genetic and environmental perturbations can disrupt normal brain function. The primary focus will be on understanding the biological bases of nervous system dysfunction. For each disease discussed, the subject matter will be organized to explain how normal brain function is impacted, the biological mechanisms underlying dysfunction (including still-unanswered questions) and current efforts to develop effective treatments (translational research). With this approach, students will gain an understanding of disease presentation, how animal models and human studies are being used to elucidate pathophysiological mechanisms, and opportunities and challenges in the development of new therapies. The class format will be a mix of lecture-based sessions and discussions of scientific journal articles.  Offered as NEUR 301 and NEUR 401. Prereq: BIOL 216 or NEUR 201 or PSCL 352.
NEUR 303	Methods Neuroscience Research	3 Units	This course will provide students the knowledge necessary to choose the appropriate methods needed to explore scientific questions, understand ethical research design, use safe laboratory practices and develop research skills that are highly valuable in the field of neuroscience. The topics covered in this course include basic laboratory skills, neuroanatomy, histology, neurophysiology and behavioral neuroscience. Successful completion of this course will equip students with the kinds of practical knowledge and hands-on experiences that can enhance competitiveness for internships, doctoral training programs or careers in research laboratories. Prereq: NEUR 201.
NEUR 304	The Neurobiology of Homeostasis	3 Units	This course will explore the relationship between the body and the brain through homeostasis from its development to its decline, while reviewing the known literature and discussing unanswered questions. Students will learn the basics of homeostasis in normal nervous system development and consider current research investigating perturbations leading to disorders and abnormal development. Systems that interact with the central nervous system, including the endocrine system, the immune system, and the enteric system, will be introduced and impairments in nervous system communication with these systems will be discussed in regards to neurological diseases, neuropsychiatric disorders, and injury and repair, while incorporating discussions of current diagnostic techniques, prevention and treatment. The conclusion of the course will focus on changes in the nervous system that lead to cognitive decline, memory impairments and motor deficits common in aging and neurodegenerative disorders. The overarching theme will focus on homeostatic mechanisms and how their impairment can have detrimental effects on the nervous system and its interactions with the peripheral systems throughout the lifespan. Prereq: NEUR 201.
NEUR 388	Undergraduate Research	1 - 3 Units	Guided laboratory research under the sponsorship of a SOM faculty member who conducts basic and/or translational neuroscience research. Students are required to obtain permission from the prospective research supervisor and the Neuroscience Undergraduate Curriculum Committee (NUCC) prior to enrolling in the course. Appropriate forms must be submitted to the Neurosciences Department office. At the end of the semester, a research report, written in the format of a scientific research publication, must be submitted and approved by the research mentor and the NUCC before credit is granted.
NEUR 388S	Undergraduate Research SAGES Capstone	3 Units	Guided laboratory research supervised and guided by a SOM faculty member who conducts basic and/or translational neuroscience research. Students are required to obtain permission from the prospective research supervisor and the Neuroscience Undergraduate Curriculum Committee (NUCC) prior to enrolling in the course. Appropriate forms must be submitted to the Neurosciences Department office. At the end of the semester, a research report, written in the format of a scientific research publication, must be submitted and approved by the research mentor and the NUCC before credit is granted. A public presentation is required. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
NEUR 390	Advanced Undergraduate Research in Neuroscience	1 - 3 Units	Guided laboratory research under the sponsorship of a SOM faculty member who conducts basic and/or translational neuroscience research. Students are required to obtain permission from the prospective research supervisor and the Neuroscience Undergraduate Curriculum Committee (NUCC) prior to enrolling in the course. Appropriate forms must be submitted to the Neurosciences Department office. Does not count toward the hours required for a major in neuroscience, but may be counted toward the total number of hours required for graduation. At the end of the semester, a research report, written in the format of a scientific research publication, must be submitted and approved by the research mentor and the NUCC before credit is granted. Prereq: NEUR 388 or NEUR 388S.
NEUR 401	Biological Mechanisms of Brain Disorders	3 Units	This course is designed to introduce students to a broad range of neurological and neuropsychiatric diseases and disorders in order to understand how genetic and environmental perturbations can disrupt normal brain function. The primary focus will be on understanding the biological bases of nervous system dysfunction. For each disease discussed, the subject matter will be organized to explain how normal brain function is impacted, the biological mechanisms underlying dysfunction (including still-unanswered questions) and current efforts to develop effective treatments (translational research). With this approach, students will gain an understanding of disease presentation, how animal models and human studies are being used to elucidate pathophysiological mechanisms, and opportunities and challenges in the development of new therapies. The class format will be a mix of lecture-based sessions and discussions of scientific journal articles.  Offered as NEUR 301 and NEUR 401.
NEUR 402	Principles of Neural Science	3 Units	Lecture/discussion course covering concepts in cell and molecular neuroscience, principles of systems neuroscience as demonstrated in the somatosensory system, and fundamentals of the development of the nervous system. This course will prepare students for upper level Neuroscience courses and is also suitable for students in other programs who desire an understanding of neurosciences. Recommended preparation: CBIO 453. Offered as BIOL 402 and NEUR 402.
NEUR 415	Neuroscience Seminars	1 Unit	Current topics of interest in neurosciences. Students attend weekly seminars. From this series, students prepare critiques. No credit is given for less than 75% attendance. Students may register for this course two times for a total of two credit hours over two semesters.
NEUR 419	Critical Thinking in Neuroscience	3 Units	The goal of this course is to develop the student's critical reasoning skills through reading and discussing primary research papers.  Each year, the course will focus on 3-4 different topics selected by participating Neuroscience faculty members.  Students will receive a letter grade based on their contributions to discussions, and at the discretion of the faculty, performance on exams and/or term paper. Prereq: NEUR 402.
NEUR 432	Current Topics in Vision Research	3 Units	Vision research is an exciting and multidisciplinary area that draws on the disciplines of biochemistry, genetics, molecular biology, structural biology, neuroscience, and pathology.  This graduate level course will provide the student with broad exposure to the most recent and relevant research currently being conducted in the field.  Topics will cover a variety of diseases and fundamental biological processes occurring in the eye.  Regions of the eye that will be discussed include the cornea, lens, and retina.  Vision disorders discussed include age-related macular degeneration, retinal ciliopathies, and diabetic retinopathy.  Instructors in the course are experts in their field and are members of the multidisciplinary visual sciences research community here at Case Western Reserve University.  Students will be exposed to the experimental approaches and instrumentation currently being used in the laboratory and in clinical settings.  Topics will be covered by traditional lectures, demonstrations in the laboratory and the clinic, and journal club presentations.  Students will be graded on their performance in journal club presentations (40%), research proposal (40%), and class participation (20%).  Offered as NEUR 432, PATH 432, PHRM 432 and BIOC 432.
NEUR 466	Cell Signaling	3 Units	This is an advanced problem set and research paper-based discussion format course that covers cell signaling mechanisms; there are no lectures.  Included are discussions of neurotransmitter-gated ion channels, growth factor receptor kinases, cytokine receptors, G protein-coupled receptors, steroid receptors, heterotrimeric G proteins, ras family GTPases, second messenger cascades, protein kinase cascades, second messenger regulation of transcription factors, signals for regulation of cell growth, division, tissue development and cell death. Offered as CLBY 466, NEUR 466, PHOL 466 and PHRM 466.
NEUR 473	Introduction to Neurobiology	3 Units	How nervous systems control behavior. Biophysical, biochemical and molecular biological properties of nerve cells, their organization into circuitry, and their function within networks. Emphasis on quantitative methods for modeling neurons and networks, and on critical analysis of the contemporary technical  literature in the neurosciences. Term paper required for graduate students. This course satisfies a lab requirement for the B.A. in Biology, and a Quantitative Laboratory requirements for the B.S. in Biology. Offered as BIOL 373, BIOL 473, and NEUR 473.
NEUR 474	Neurobiology of Behavior	3 Units	In this course, students will examine how neurobiologists interested in animal behavior study the linkage between neural circuitry and complex behavior.  Various vertebrate and invertebrate systems will be considered.  Several exercises will be used in this endeavor.  Although some lectures will provide background and context on specific neural systems, the emphasis of the course will be on classroom discussion of specific journal articles. In addition, students will each complete a project in which they will observe some animal behavior and generate both behavioral and neurobiological hypotheses related to it.  In lieu of examinations, students will complete three written assignments, including a theoretical grant proposal, a one-page Specific Aims paper related to the project, and a final project paper.  These assignments are designed to give each student experience in writing biologically-relevant documents.  Classroom discussions will help students understand the content and format of each type document.  They will also present their projects orally to the entire class.  Offered as BIOL 374, BIOL 474 and NEUR 474. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
NEUR 475	Protein Biophysics	3 Units	This course focuses on in-depth understanding of the molecular biophysics of proteins. Structural, thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of protein function and structure-function relationships will be considered at the advanced conceptual level. The application of these theoretical frameworks will be illustrated with examples from the literature and integration of biophysical knowledge with description at the cellular and systems level. The format consists of lectures, problem sets, and student presentations. A special emphasis will be placed on discussion of original publications.  Offered as BIOC 475, CHEM 475, PHOL 475, PHRM 475, and NEUR 475.
NEUR 478	Computational Neuroscience	3 Units	Computer simulations and mathematical analysis of neurons and neural circuits, and the computational properties of nervous systems.  Students are taught a range of models for neurons and neural circuits, and are asked to implement and explore the computational and dynamic properties of these models.  The course introduces students to dynamical systems theory for the analysis of neurons and neural learning, models of brain systems, and their relationship to artificial and neural networks.  Term project required.  Students enrolled in MATH 478 will make arrangements with the instructor to attend additional lectures and complete additional assignments addressing mathematical topics related to the course.   Recommended preparation: MATH 223 and MATH 224 or BIOL 300 and BIOL 306. Offered as BIOL 378, COGS 378, MATH 378, BIOL 478, CSDS 478, EBME 478, ECSE 478, MATH 478 and NEUR 478.
NEUR 601	Research in Neuroscience	1 - 18 Units	
NEUR 651	Master's Thesis (M.S.)	1 - 6 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Recommended preparation: M.S. candidates only.
NEUR 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
NUNP 401	Development and Health Promotion in Children and Adolescents	3 Units	This course will examine the concepts of development and health promotion in children and adolescents.  Concepts and theories from nursing and other related disciplines will be explored. Clinical application of theories and advanced nursing strategies to optimize the health of children, adolescents, and their families will be emphasized in the professional role development of students. Prereq: Enrolled in MSN program.
NUNP 402	Common and Acute Health Problems of Children	6 Units	This course will introduce the common and acute health problems occurring in infancy through adolescence using a biological, psychological, social, cultural, and family-centered approach.  Knowledge of pathophysiology, advanced assessment, and diagnostic reasoning for acute and common problems in children and adolescents will be emphasized.  Strategies used to improve health outcomes will be discussed. Prereq: NURS 453, NURS 459 and NUNP 410.  Prereq or Coreq: NURS 430.
NUNP 403	Advanced Management in Pediatric Primary Care	5 Units	This course will focus on the primary and rehabilitative health care management of complex, multi-dimensional health problems experienced by children and adolescents within the context of their family and community environments. Pathophysiology, advanced assessment, and diagnostic reasoning specific to complex health problems in children and adolescents will be emphasized. Emphasis will be placed on the consultation and referral processes within interprofessional teams. Prereq: NUNP 402.
NUNP 405	Foundations for the Neonatal Nurse Practitioner	3 Units	This course introduces the role of the Neonatal Nurse Practitioner and concepts relevant to the management of the neonate. Students analyze nursing strategies to optimize health behaviors in families with neonates. Coreq: NUNP 416.
NUNP 410	Health Promotion Across the Life Span	2 Units	This course introduces diagnostic reasoning skills related to health promotion, disease prevention, and maintenance of function across the lifespan.  Students develop skills that foster wellness in individuals, families, and communities. Epidemiological principles, risk appraisals, and other strategies are incorporated.
NUNP 412	Health Problems of the Neonate	4 Units	This course will focus on the high-risk neonate.   Advanced practice nursing strategies that enhance, maintain, and restore health in ill neonates and their families will be addressed   Diagnostic and therapeutic approaches specific to the neonate will be emphasized. Prereq: NUNP 405 and NUNP 416.
NUNP 413	Adv Mgmnt Acutely Ill Neonate	3 Units	This course will focus on assessment, and diagnostic approaches in implementation of management plans for neonates with acute health problems. Pathophysiologic changes specific to neonates with acute health problems will be incorporated. Concepts related to discharge planning and long-term follow-up will be introduced. Prereq: NUNP 405 and NUNP 412.
NUNP 414	Advanced Management of Neonates with Complex Health Problems	5 Units	This course will focus on assessment and diagnostic approaches in implementation of management plans for neonates with acute and complex health problems.  Pathophysiologic changes specific to neonates with complex health problems will be incorporated. Emphasis will be placed on consultation and referral processes within interprofessional teams. Prereq: NUNP 413.
NUNP 416	Integrated Assessment of the Neonate	3 Units	This course will introduce principles fundamental to the integrated assessment of the neonate. It will stress perinatal history taking including assessment of genetic risks, gestational age assessment, and physical assessment skills. The course will provide the basis for problem identification, decision making, advanced therapeutics, and case management. Coreq: NUNP 405.
NUNP 419	Family Health Nursing: Health of Adults and Older Adults	5 Units	This course will introduce students to the practice of primary health care of adults and older adults. Principles of health promotion, disease prevention, management of common acute and chronic health problems and the impact of the family will be incorporated. Emphasis will be placed on the physical, psychological, social and cultural aspects of care. Pathophysiology, assessment and diagnostic techniques specific to common acute and chronic health problems will be integrated.  Strategies related to health and illness care will be used to enhance, maintain, and restore health. Collaboration with other health care professionals will be integrated to enhance patient outcomes. Prereq: NURS 453, NURS 459 and NUNP 410. Coreq: NURS 430.
NUNP 429	Health Promotion & Common Reproductive Health Problems of Adolescents and Adults	4 Units	This course introduces the student to the care of the woman from puberty through menopause and her family.    Physical and psychosocial health and deviations before, during, and after the childbearing years are assessed.  The course content includes principles of education for childbearing, parenting, and fertility control.   Strategies to optimize health-seeking behaviors are identified.  Content on pregnancy and postpartum care is integrated into the course. Prereq: NURS 459.
NUNP 432	Common & Acute Health Problems of the Adult and Older Adult	5 Units	This course will introduce the common and acute health problems occurring across the adult life span.  A problem-oriented approach will be used with emphasis on the biological, psychological, social, and cultural aspects of care.  Advanced assessment, and diagnostic reasoning strategies specific to the acute and common problems of adults and older adults will be included.  Principles of pathophysiology and pharmacology will be incorporated. Advanced practice nursing strategies to enhance, maintain, and restore health will be emphasized. Prereq: NURS 453, NURS 459 and NUNP 410.  Prereq or Coreq: NURS 430.
NUNP 434	Advanced Management in Adult and Older Adult Primary Care	5 Units	This course will focus on health care concepts specific to the management of complex multidimensional health problems experienced by adults and older adults within the context of their family and community environments.  Pathophysiology, assessment, and diagnostic strategies specific to complex health problems will be emphasized.  Principles of pathophysiology and pharmacology will be incorporated in the development, implementation, and evaluation of plans of care to enhance patient outcomes. Prereq: NUNP 449.
NUNP 438	Foundations for Adult-Gerontology Acute Care Nursing	4 Units	The course focuses on establishing elements of advanced nursing practice assessment and diagnostic reasoning across the continuum of healthcare services to meet the specialized physiologic and psychological needs of adults and older adults with complex acute and/or chronic health conditions. Prereq or Coreq: NURS 453 and NURS 459 or students with an MSN and NP certification, permission of faculty.
NUNP 439	Family Health Nursing: Health of Children and Adolescents	4 Units	In this course, students will be introduced to the influence of family dynamics in the practice of primary health care of children and adolescents. The course will include the application of the principles of growth and development, disease prevention, health promotion, and management of common acute and chronic health problems in children and adolescents. Clinical application of strategies to optimize health seeking behaviors will be emphasized. Collaboration with other health care professionals to enhance patient care will be reinforced. Prereq: NUNP 429.
NUNP 443	Acute Health Problems of Adults and Older Adults	6 Units	In this second of sequenced Adult-Gerontology Acute Care Nursing clinical courses, the emphasis is on the pathophysiology, assessment, and diagnostic approaches to adults and older adults with complex acute and chronic health disorders that manifest with physiologic instability.  The clinical practicum focuses on further development of diagnostic reasoning, clinical judgment, caring practices, and collaboration in health care systems that deliver acute and critical advanced practice nursing. Prereq or Coreq: NURS 438 and NURS 459 and NURS 453 and NURS 430 or Requisites Not Met permission.
NUNP 444	Advanced Management of Acutely Ill Adults and Older Adults	4 Units	This third clinical course in the Adult-Gerontology Acute Care Nurse Practitioner sequence focuses on concepts specific to complex, multi-dimensional health problems of acute and critically ill adults and older adults.  Clinical practice focuses on the management of patients with complex health problems and life-threatening conditions across the entire adult population. Prereq: NUNP 443.
NUNP 449	Advanced Practice Nursing Care of the Older Adult	4 Units	This course will integrate the principles of health promotion, disease prevention and rehabilitation in the care of older adults.  The assessment of nutritional needs, functional status, mental status, social support systems, and caregiver stress will be addressed.  These factors are analyzed in various environments of care.  Cultural, ethnic, and developmental issues are addressed.  The diagnosis, treatment and management of acute and chronic conditions associated with aging, but that can also occur in younger adults, are presented.  Interventions appropriate to restore or maintain an optimal level of function will be included. Palliative and end-of-life care will be addressed. Prereq: NUNP 432.
NUNP 455	Management of Complex Acute Problems in Children and Adolescents I	4 Units	This course will apply knowledge, evidence, advanced skills, interventions, and pharmacotherapy in the management of children and adolescents with acute, chronic and critical conditions within the context of family-centered care. Assessment strategies and management principles will be addressed. (Minimum of one year nursing experience in a pediatric acute care setting.  Certification in PALS is required.) Prereq or Coreq: NUNP 402.
NUNP 456	Management of Complex Acute Problems in Children and Adolescents II	5 Units	This course will integrate knowledge, research, advanced skills and interventions with children and adolescents with complex acute, critical and chronic health conditions.  Advanced practice strategies and management principles will be addressed including knowledge and skills with technological assessment modalities and procedures associated with the care of acutely and critically ill children and adolescents within the context of family-centered care. Prereq: NUNP 455.
NUNP 464	Global Clinical Learning	1 Unit	This course will allow the MSN student to engage in clinical work in low and middle income medically under resourced communities providing direct patient care under clinical supervision of MSN faculty. Students will prepare for the experience by gaining knowledge of the history and culture of the region, common diseases prevalent in the area and orientation to the site operations.  The student will focus on the 1) steps to diagnose, treat and implement a plan of care for area specific diseases; 2) culturally and resource appropriate treatments; 3) dental hygiene and nutrition as they impact the health of the local population. Students will prepare culturally appropriate presentations for local nurses and contribute to the preparation of non-medical members of the team for patient safety using current evidence based practices. Offered as NUNP 464 and NURS 464. Prereq: Enrollment in MSN, DNP or PhD in Nursing Program.
NUAN 443	Professional Role	1 Unit	This course will explore the role of the Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetist. Emphasis will be placed on the historical development of the role, regulation of practice, professional organizations, and professional practice standards and guidelines.
NUAN 450	Pharmacological Strategies in Anesthesia Practice	2 Units	This course will provide a comprehensive analysis of anesthetic agents, adjunct drugs, and pharmacologic principles related to the practice of anesthesia. The interaction between anesthetic agents and other pharmacologic therapy will be identified. (Admission to program or permission of instructor required.)
NUAN 458	Principles of Anesthesia I	4 Units	This course will introduce the student to the practice of nurse anesthesia. Emphasis will be placed on development of foundational knowledge, skills, and techniques necessary for delivery of safe, effective anesthesia care across the lifespan. This will be the first of two courses to provide an overview of the fundamentals of anesthesia practice. This course will focus on knowledge and skills necessary to deliver safe anesthesia care. (Enrollment in nurse anesthesia program)
NUAN 459	Principles of Anesthesia II	4 Units	This course will introduce the student to the practice of nurse anesthesia. Emphasis will be placed on development of foundational knowledge, skills, and techniques necessary for delivery of safe, effective anesthesia care across the lifespan. This will be the second of two courses to provide an overview of the fundamentals of anesthesia practice. This course will focus on principles applicable to specific patient populations. Prereq: NUAN 458.
NUAN 460	Advanced Principles of Anesthesia I	4 Units	This course will provide an in-depth exploration of the anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology of the cardiovascular, respiratory, and hematologic systems in the context of anesthesia care. Implications of disease states in these systems for all types of surgery will be explored, with emphasis on anesthetic management of surgical procedures related to these systems. Prereq: NUAN 459.
NUAN 461	Advanced Principles of Anesthesia II	3 Units	This course will provide an in-depth exploration of the anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology of the renal, endocrine, immunologic, musculoskeletal, hepatobiliary, and neurologic systems in the context of anesthesia care. Implications of disease states in these systems for all types of surgery will be explored, with emphasis on anesthetic management of surgical procedures related to these systems. Prereq: NUAN 460.
NUAN 462	Advanced Principles of Anesthesia III	3 Units	This course will provide an in-depth exploration of the anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology of pediatric, obstetric, geriatric, and obese patients within the context of anesthesia care. Implications of physiologic changes across the lifespan will be explored, with emphasis on the anesthetic management of anesthetic and surgical procedures related to these patient populations. Prereq: NUAN 461.
NUAN 507	Nurse Anesthesia Practice Management	1 Unit	This course will focus on management, entrepreneurial concepts, and topics related to nurse anesthesia practice. Seminars will focus on integrating legal, fiscal, quality improvement, and other factors that affect environments of care. Prereq: Enrolled in DNP Anesthesia program or Requisites Not Met permission.
NUAN 550A	Anesthesia Seminar I	1 Unit	This course is the first of a three-course sequence designed to examine the current body of knowledge related to nurse anesthesia practice. Emphasis will be placed on analysis of theory and evidence, and application of research outcomes. Prereq: NUAN 462.
NUAN 550B	Anesthesia Seminar II	1 Unit	This course is the second of a three-course sequence designed to examine the current body of knowledge related to nurse anesthesia practice. Emphasis will be placed on analysis of theory and evidence, and application of research outcomes. Prereq: NUAN 550A.
NUAN 550C	Anesthesia Seminar III	1 Unit	This course is the third of a three-course sequence designed to examine the current body of knowledge related to nurse anesthesia practice. Emphasis will be placed on analysis of theory and evidence, and application of relevant research outcomes. Prereq: NUAN 550B.
NUAN 551A	Nurse Anesthesia Advanced Clinical Practicum I	1 Unit	This course will emphasize nurse anesthesia care for individuals with complex medical conditions, or those who require increasingly complex procedures. Students will demonstrate advanced monitoring techniques, safe use of pharmacologic agents, and the management of high-stress situations. Prereq: NUAN 462.
NUAN 551B	Nurse Anesthesia: Advanced Clinical Practicum II	1 Unit	This course will emphasize nurse anesthesia care for individuals with complex medical conditions, or those who require increasingly complex procedures. Students will demonstrate advanced monitoring techniques, safe use of pharmacologic agents, and the management of high-stress situations. Prereq: NUAN 551A.
NUAN 551C	Nurse Anesthesia -Advanced Clinical Practicum III	1 Unit	This course will emphasize nurse anesthesia care for individuals with complex medical conditions, or those who require increasingly complex procedures. Students will demonstrate advanced monitoring techniques, safe use of pharmacologic agents, and the management of high-stress situations. Prereq: NUAN 551B.
NUAN 551D	Nurse Anesthesia-Advanced Clinical Practicum IV	1 Unit	This course will emphasize nurse anesthesia care for individuals with complex medical conditions, or those who require increasingly complex procedures. Students will demonstrate advanced monitoring techniques, safe use of pharmacologic agents, and the management of high-stress situations. Prereq: NUAN 551C.
NUAN 552	Nurse Anesthesia: Advanced Practice II	1 - 5 Units	The continuation of advanced, independent clinical nurse anesthesia administration. Emphasis is on management of higher risk patients for more difficult procedures, performing total anesthetic care with minimum of anesthesiologist supervision, and readiness for transition from student to graduate status. Prereq: NUAN 551A and NUAN 551B and NUAN 551C.
NUED 432	Common & Acute Health Problems of the Adult and Older Adult	3 Units	This course introduces the common and acute health problems occurring across the adult life span. A problem-oriented approach is used with emphasis on the biological, psychological, social, and cultural aspects of care. Pathophysiology, pharmacology, assessment, and diagnostic strategies specific to the acute and common problems of adults and older adults will be included. Nursing strategies used to enhance, maintain, and restore health will be emphasized. Prereq: NURS 459 and NUNP 410. Coreq: NURS 430.
NUED 434	Advanced Management in Adult and Older Adult Primary Care	3 Units	This course focuses on the health care concepts specific to the management of complex multidimensional health problems experienced by adults, older adults within the context of their family and community environments.  Pathophysiology, assessment, and diagnostic strategies specific to complex health problems are emphasized.  The selection of management strategies used to enhance outcomes will be stressed. Prereq: NUED 449.
NUED 449	Primary Care of the Older Adult	3 Units	This course will focus on the assessment of the older adult's nutritional needs, functional status, mental status (cognitive and affective), social support systems, and caregiver stress. These factors are analyzed in various environments, such as acute care, ambulatory care, home care, day care, long-term care, and rehabilitation. Epidemiological and health behavior models are used to assess health risks, assist with problem identification, primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention strategies. Cultural, ethnic, and developmental issues are addressed.  Concepts, assessment strategies, interventions and evaluation approaches specific for older adults are identified. Prereq: NUED 432.
NUED 509	Curriculum and Instruction	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to explore the theoretical underpinnings of education and to examine innovative approaches to critical thinking. Students are provided the opportunity to analyze philosophies and principles of education along with teaching and learning styles. The focus of this course is on curriculum planning and development congruent with the philosophy and objectives of a nursing program. Curriculum development includes determination of program and course objectives, along with selection and organization of appropriate learning experiences to meet these objectives. Techniques for instruction in the classroom, laboratory, and clinical settings are explored.
NUED 609	Theoretical Foundations of Educational Testing and Evaluation	2 Units	In this course, an overview of educational measurement and evaluation is provided. Methods of evaluating teaching effectiveness, student learning, and student performance are explored. Prereq: NUED 509.
NTRN 200	Case Cooks: Ethnic Eats	1 Unit	In a world as connected as ours, it is important to learn about others' cultures; and what better way to learn than through the medium of food!  Something as simple as food can be interpreted thousands of ways and can serve as a link from our culture to ethnicities around the world.  This half-semester class focuses on exploring cultural diversity in a way that everyone can relate to while also incorporating healthy, simple, budget friendly cooking skills.  Course is geared towards the beginner skill level.  Each week we will explore a different region of the world including Africa, South America, Europe, Asia, and the Middle East!  Note: Please email instructor before registering if you have food allergies.
NTRN 200H	Case Cooks: Healthy Lifestyles	1 Unit	Studies say that those who frequently cook meals at home eat healthier, consume fewer calories and are happier than those who eat out. Isn't it time you learn to cook? Join your classmates for a fun, edible education. This half-semester class focuses on healthy, simple, budget friendly cooking skills to increase your confidence in the kitchen. Course is geared towards the beginner skill level. Weekly cooking topics include, Treasures from the earth, Keep it simple & Make it quick, Protein power, Grocery game plans & Mastering Student Meals, Make it lighter.  Note: Please email instructor before registering if you have food allergies.
NTRN 200S	Case Cooks:Sports and Performance	1 Unit	Proper nutrition and hydration have a major impact on health and sports performance across all levels of training and competition. When active individuals/sports enthusiasts/athletes want to improve their performance, whether it is strength, speed, endurance, or power, they need to train and eat with proper guidance. Investing time to develop eating plans that are mindful of your type of activity and performance goals will optimize training, refuel and rehydrate faster, and decrease risk of illness and injury. This half-semester class focuses on healthy, simple, budget-friendly cooking skills that will help develop an understanding of healthy food and fluid choices to fuel an athlete/sports enthusiast/active individuals' body before, during and after activity when training, competing, recovering or traveling. Weekly cooking topics include: Overall Athlete Nutrition, Carbohydrates, Protein, Recovery & Immunity, Antioxidants & Inflammation, Hydration & Traveling/On-The Go.
NTRN 201	Nutrition	3 Units	The nutrients, their functions, food sources, and factors affecting human needs throughout life.
NTRN 300	Healthy Lifestyles as Preventive Medicine	3 Units	Decades of research have shown that a healthy lifestyle will significantly reduce the risk of chronic disease, improve health and quality of life. Because of this research, support has emerged that healthy lifestyles are in fact the "best preventive medicine". This course will focus on learning the key components of these healthy lifestyle principles and developing the skills necessary to practice and advocate a healthy lifestyle. It is designed for any student interested in learning how to practice and promote healthy lifestyles, but it is particularly helpful for all pre-health, public health, and nutrition majors.  *A unique feature of this course is the opportunity for enrolled students, (who are interested), to pair with advanced nutrition students throughout the semester for `healthy eating' guidance. Enrolled students will have healthy eating coaches!
NTRN 310	Understanding Plant-Based Diets in Health and Disease	3 Units	This course presents a holistic understanding of plant-based diets in human health, including influence on disease risk, as well as controversies and confusion associated with these plant-based diets. Students will also learn how to plan budget friendly, easy to prepare plant-based diets.
NTRN 320	Women's Wellness: From Food and Nutrition to Reproductive Health and Aging	3 Units	An understanding of the impact and role of food, nutrition and one's lifelong dietary and lifestyle patterns is essential to positively impact and optimize the health and well-being of women across the lifespan.  In this course, students will be immersed in learning about the importance of these factors on an array of women's wellness topics that range from fad diets, weight management and dietary supplements to reproductive health, healthy gaining, female athlete concerns, mental well-being, stress/anxiety and beauty: hair, skin and nails. This course is intended for undergraduate students of all majors, class rank and gender.
NTRN 328	Child Nutrition, Development and Health	3 Units	The relationship between nutrition and physical/cognitive growth and development of the child from the prenatal period through adolescence, including individuality, maturation and biological needs.  Nutritional influences (nutrient requirements, food choices, and nutritional/feeding problems) and effects on health are emphasized.
NTRN 337	Nutrition Communication, Counseling and Behavior Change Strategies	3 Units	How do we help someone make a dietary behavior change, such as choosing a side salad instead of fries when eating a hamburger? Yes, it is a very challenging task and most often, providing just nutrition education is not sufficient. Therefore, the focus of this course is to prepare students for their future career by providing fundamental knowledge about human decision making and developing communication skills that can help improve others nutritional well-being. In addition, the course will critically evaluate and interpret nutrition information for the consumer.  Changes in food marketing and sources of nutrition information for consumers over the past five decades will be analyzed and discussed.  Furthermore, the impact of nutrition labeling, the food industry and food marketing on the dietary intake of Americans and various demographic groups in the U.S. will be studied. Offered as NTRN 337 and NTRN 437 Prereq: NTRN 201 or Requisites Not Met permission.
NTRN 338	Dietary Supplements	3 Units	An examination of dietary supplements specific to health promotion and disease prevention/treatment throughout the life cycle. Topics and concepts include regulation, controversies, safety, efficacy, and the surrounding scientific evidence for dietary supplement use. For NTRN 338, preference will be given to senior level Nutrition majors. Offered as NTRN 338 and NTRN 438. Prereq: Junior or Senior Standing.
NTRN 340	Global Food Systems: Environmental Issues, Sustainability, and Health	3 Units	Environmental changes impact humans worldwide, with an influence lasting many generations into the future. An in-depth understanding of the interplay between food systems - global food production, distribution, and selection - and environment and sustainability issues, as related to human nutrition, health, and well-being has never been more important. This course will provide an in-depth analysis regarding how food systems and the environment are interconnected in a multitude of ways. Additionally, the course will examine how issues of sustainability effect food production, distribution, and quality. Further, how environmental and sustainability issues directly affect the nutritive qualities of foods. Course topics initially include a review of environmental factors impacting food systems, types of sustainable food systems, historical perspectives, and aspects of human nutrition. Once students master the initial concepts, then into more detailed topics related to production approaches, biotechnology, soil/water quality, and food security on a local, national, and global level will be studied.
NTRN 341	Food as Medicine: How what we eat influences how we feel, think, and our health status	3 Units	This course will discuss key aspects of the interplay between food and health/wellness and in particular food synergy - interactions among dietary components and the effects on health. What are "whole foods" vs. basic nutrients? What are the most common nutrient deficiencies in men, women and children, including the elderly? Students will learn to interpret dietary recommendations/guidelines and which foods are used to improve digestion, optimize cardiovascular health and immune function, and help prevent cancer. Basic discussion of importance of gut micro-flora. Diet and body weight; also pros and cons of different dieting strategies. Increasing awareness of "culinary medicine" (i.e. how food acts as an integrated therapy). How what we eat influences how we feel, think and our general health status. There is an integrated culinary experience. Prereq: NTRN 201 or requisites not met permission.
NTRN 342	Food Science	3 Units	Chemical, physical and biological properties of food constituents and their interactions in food preparation and processing and practical application of processing methods and their effect on nutritional quality and acceptability; including global food biodiversity. Prereq: CHEM 105.
NTRN 342L	Food Science Lab	2 Units	Apply knowledge of the physical, chemical, and biological aspects of food and food ingredients to actual experimentation with foods.  Acquire understanding of how food ingredients and their interactions and the preparation process influence acceptability of the final food product.  Enhance familiarity with safe food handling during preparation and post-preparation. Prereq: CHEM 106.  Coreq: NTRN 342.
NTRN 343	Dietary Patterns	3 Units	Examination of the food supply in the United States as it is affected by production, processing, marketing, government programs, regulation, and consumer selection. Nutritional evaluation of dietary patterns of different cultures. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: NTRN 201.
NTRN 351	Food Service Systems Management	3 Units	The application of organizational theory and skills in the preparation and service of quantity food. Laboratory experience in professional food services are included. Graduate students will analyze one aspect of food service management in depth.  Offered as NTRN 351 and NTRN 451. Prereq: Nutrition major or consent of instructor.
NTRN 360	Clinical Assessment and Diagnosis: Nutritional, Functional, Physical	3 Units	Methods for the provision of nutrition services to individuals and groups. Principles of professional practice including ethics, standards, and regulatory issues. Prereq: NTRN 201 and NTRN 363 or MS in Nutrition or MS in Public Health Nutrition.
NTRN 361	Metabolic Dysregulation of Energy from Obesity to Anorexia	3 Units	Energy imbalance and the implications on health will be explored in this course. Key concepts covered in this class include: 1. Energy imbalance refers to positive and negative states of energy balance and occurs when energy intake does not match energy expended in metabolic processes, daily living activities, and physical activity; 2. Obesity is a result of chronic positive energy balance whereas anorexia nervosa is a condition of chronic negative energy balance; 3. Energy metabolism is controlled by a complex array of neural and hormonal signaling;  4. Energy imbalance disrupts the neural and hormonal signaling pathways of energy metabolism resulting in unfavorable health consequences such as pro-inflammatory state, oxidative stress, immune dysregulation, menstrual dysfunction, sarcopenia, and low bone mineral density; and 5. Exercise training can impact energy imbalance health-related outcomes.  Learning Outcomes: Students will be able to 1. define energy balance and explain the components of energy expenditure; 2. define disordered eating, female athlete triad, and disordered eating;  3. explain the relationship among energy intake, energy expenditure, and body composition in energy imbalance; 4. describe alterations in skeletal muscle and adipose physiology in energy imbalance; 5. diagram neural control of feeding and energy homeostasis and hormonal control of energy metabolism; 6. explain the neural and hormonal changes that occur in chronic energy imbalance and describe current theories in how it results in menstrual dysfunction, inflammatory response, oxidative stress, immune dysregulation, sarcopenia, and low bone mineral density; and 7. explain how exercise training can influence inflammatory response, oxidative stress, immune function, and musculoskeletal health in energy imbalance. Offered as NTRN 361 and NTRN 461. Prereq: NTRN 201 or requisites not met permission.
NTRN 362	Exercise Physiology and Macronutrient Metabolism	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to provide students with the knowledge of theoretical and applied concepts of exercise physiology. Students will gain an understanding of the acute and chronic physiological responses and adaptations of the cardiovascular, metabolic, hormonal, and neuromuscular systems in response to exercise.  Additional topics include factors effecting performance, assessing cardiorespiratory and muscular fitness, designing exercise programs for health and wellness, special populations, and athletes, environmental considerations and nutrition's role in sport and exercise performance. Offered as NTRN 362 and NTRN 462. Prereq: NTRN 201 and BIOL 216.
NTRN 363	Human Nutrition I: Energy, Protein, Minerals	3 Units	Chemical and physiological properties of specific nutrients, including interrelationships and multiple factors, in meeting nutritional needs throughout the life cycle. Prereq:  BIOL 216 and (Junior or Senior status).
NTRN 364	Human Nutrition II: Vitamins	3 Units	Chemical and physiological properties of vitamins, including interrelationships and multiple factors, in meeting nutritional needs throughout the life cycle. Prereq: NTRN 363.
NTRN 365	Nutrition for the Prevention and Management of Disease: Pathophysiology	4 Units	Interplay among etiology, metabolic perturbations, pathophysiology, clinical signs and symptoms, and nutrition principles for the prevention and management of disease. Prereq: NTRN 363 and BIOC 307 or equivalent or consent of instructor.
NTRN 366	Nutrition for the Prevention and Management of Disease: Clinical Applications	3 Units	Application of nutrition principles and knowledge for the prevention and management of disease.  Case studies and other educational approaches and techniques will be used.  Course includes evidence-based assessments and interpretation of key data (biochemical, dietary, physical) to develop nutritional interventions. Coreq: NTRN 365.
NTRN 371	Special Problems	1 - 3 Units	Independent reading, research, or special projects supervised by a member of the nutrition faculty. Prereq: Junior or senior standing.
NTRN 388	Seminar in Sports Nutrition	3 Units	Study of energy and nutrient needs to support recreational exercise and competitive athletics, dietary supplements and specific foods and beverages that are marketed to athletes, and how nutrition can provide optimal muscle development, recovery and sports performance. Prereq: Junior or senior standing.
NTRN 390	Undergraduate Research	3 - 9 Units	Guided laboratory research in nutritional biochemistry or molecular nutrition under the sponsorship of a nutrition faculty member.
NTRN 397	SAGES Capstone Proposal Seminar	3 Units	In this departmental seminar course, students will conceptualize, develop and prepare a written plan, known as the "Capstone Proposal," for their senior Capstone project (NTRN 398: Senior Capstone Experience). Discussion will include, but not be limited to basic research principles, different types of research, ethics and IRB procedures. The Capstone Proposal shall include the project design, aims, methodology, budget, data analysis and presentation. Upon completion of this course, students will have confirmed student/Capstone advisor and, if applicable, mentor relationships, written a Capstone proposal and given an oral presentation of their proposal at a departmental colloquium. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: Declared Nutrition or Nutritional Biochemistry and Metabolism major and junior standing.
NTRN 397R	SAGES Capstone Proposal Seminar: Research	3 Units	This course fulfills the SAGES Department Seminar requirement. As such, it focuses on developing writing and discussion skills in your major area. This course will guide you through the process of selecting and planning your SAGES Capstone Experience to be completed in NTRN 398. Students will be matched to existing faculty nutrition research projects for their capstone experience.  Concurrent enrollment with any other SAGES requirement is not permitted. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: Nutrition major with Junior standing. Completed SAGES First Seminar and both SAGES University Seminars.
NTRN 398	SAGES Senior Capstone Experience	3 Units	This course fulfills the SAGES Capstone requirement of a culminating experience in the major with a final public presentation and written report.  The project varies year to year but will provide elements of nutrition research and/or nutrition education for the public and assignments to provide scaffolding towards the final presentation and report. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: (Nutrition or Nutritional Biochem and Metabolism Major) and Senior standing.
NTRN 399	Senior Project	3 Units	Formal investigation of a topic in nutrition culminating in a paper and oral presentation. Requires definition of a problem, evaluation of the scientific literature and delineation of problem-solving approaches. Recommended preparation: Twenty-one hours of Nutrition.
NTRN 401	Nutrition for Community and Health Care Professionals	2 - 3 Units	This course will focus on understanding how diet and nutrition impact health and wellness throughout the life cycle. There are core concepts in human nutrition that all health care providers should understand to optimize their care of individuals, themselves, and the community. These core concepts are the focus of this course. Students who complete all course modules and assignments with a passing grade will earn 2 credits. In order to earn 3 credits, students must complete all course modules and assignments with a passing grade and complete an additional 20 page paper on a nutrition topic approved by the instructor.
NTRN 402	Culinary and Lifestyle Medicine Coaching I	3 Units	This course will focus on learning the key components of healthy lifestyle principles* and develop the counseling and behavior change skills necessary to promote these competencies to advocate a healthy lifestyle. Participation in culinary medicine food labs, (which is the blending of the science of nutrition with skills in fundamental cooking and food education) is also a key component of this class. Culinary medicine is designed to foster a greater understanding of the core principles in medical nutrition therapy and foundational food and nutrition education, which is critical to overall well-being.   Students will also have the elective opportunity to participate in a Health and Wellness Coaching training certificate from the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. Listening to the 4 modules comprising this certificate, (each 60-90 minutes), and completion of a post exam with at least an 80% score will result in a certificate of participation in Health and Wellness Coaching. Module 1 establishes the framework and basic skills; Module 2 is focused on facilitating behavior change; Module 3 explains the technique of using a positive approach to health and wellness coaching and the 4th final module involves application and practice.   *Core components of a healthy lifestyle include: A dietary pattern that is calorically sufficient, focused on minimally processed foods in balanced proportions; routine physical activity at recommended levels of intensity, frequency and duration; avoidance of toxins such as alcohol, tobacco and non-medically prescribed drugs; adequate quantity and quality of sleep; mitigating excess stress via a variety of evidence-based stress reduction techniques and strong social bonds.
NTRN 403	Evidence-Based Practice for Healthcare Professionals	1 Unit	In this course, students will learn how to use the evidence-based practice process to make decisions and answer questions in a clinical setting. This course may be appropriate for any student pursuing a career in healthcare, however the examples and cases used in class focus on nutrition-related issues. Prereq: Graduate student standing.
NTRN 410	Basic Oxygen & Physiological Function	3 Units	On-line lecture only course which explores the significance and consequences of oxygen and oxygen metabolism in living organisms.  Topics to be covered include transport by blood tissues, oxygen toxicity, and mitochondrial metabolism.  Emphasis will be placed on mammalian physiology with special reference to brain oxidative metabolism and blood flow as well as whole body energy expenditure and oxidative stress related to disease.  The course will cover additional spans of physiology, nutrition and anatomy. Offered as NTRN 410 and PHOL 410.
NTRN 433	Advanced Human Nutrition I	4 Units	Emphasis on reading original research literature in energy, protein and minerals with development of critical evaluation and thinking skills. Recommended preparation: NTRN 201 and CHEM 223 and BIOL 348 or equivalent.
NTRN 434	Advanced Human Nutrition II	3 Units	Emphasis on reading original research literature on vitamins with development of critical evaluation and thinking skills. Recommended preparation: NTRN 433 or consent.
NTRN 435	Nutrition during Pregnancy	3 Units	Study of current research literature on nutrition for pregnancy and lactation including nutrient requirements, nutrition assessment, and nutrition intervention. Prereq: Graduate Student in Nutrition or Public Health Nutrition or (NTRN 363 and NTRN 364) or requisites not met permission.
NTRN 436	Pediatric Nutrition	3 Units	This course will focus on understanding the nutritional needs of infants, children and adolescents.  Evidence based guidelines will be used as we discuss best clinical practice for the management of pediatric nutrition issues.  Anthropometric measurements used in growth assessment will be reviewed. Nutrient requirements for each stage of development will be explored with a specific focus on micronutrients relevant to pediatrics such as fluoride, iron, calcium and vitamin D. Abnormal growth resulting in malnutrition and obesity will be examined with a focus on prevention, diagnosis and treatment.  Skills necessary to complete a pediatric nutrition assessment will be reviewed with opportunities to practice and demonstrate competency. Prereq: NTRN 435.
NTRN 437	Nutrition Communication, Counseling and Behavior Change Strategies	3 Units	How do we help someone make a dietary behavior change, such as choosing a side salad instead of fries when eating a hamburger? Yes, it is a very challenging task and most often, providing just nutrition education is not sufficient. Therefore, the focus of this course is to prepare students for their future career by providing fundamental knowledge about human decision making and developing communication skills that can help improve others nutritional well-being. In addition, the course will critically evaluate and interpret nutrition information for the consumer.  Changes in food marketing and sources of nutrition information for consumers over the past five decades will be analyzed and discussed.  Furthermore, the impact of nutrition labeling, the food industry and food marketing on the dietary intake of Americans and various demographic groups in the U.S. will be studied. Offered as NTRN 337 and NTRN 437 Prereq: NTRN 201 or Requisites Not Met permission.
NTRN 438	Dietary Supplements	3 Units	An examination of dietary supplements specific to health promotion and disease prevention/treatment throughout the life cycle. Topics and concepts include regulation, controversies, safety, efficacy, and the surrounding scientific evidence for dietary supplement use. For NTRN 338, preference will be given to senior level Nutrition majors. Offered as NTRN 338 and NTRN 438. Prereq: NTRN 364 or requisites not met permission.
NTRN 439	Food Behavior: Physiological, Psychological and Environmental Determinants	3 Units	Good dietary habits are associated with improved population health. Despite this, a large proportion of individuals do not meet current dietary recommendations and there are significant disparities between groups based on sociodemographic characteristics. Why is this? Traditional views on this question focused solely on individual decision making without taking into account the complex influence of biology, social forces, and environment on dietary behavior. This course will introduce students to the major influences on dietary behavior and their interactions and modifying factors in the context of the socioecological model.
NTRN 440	Nutrition for the Aging and Aged	3 Units	Consideration of the processes of aging and needs which continue throughout life. The influences of food availability, intake, economics, culture, physical and social conditions and chronic disease as they affect the ability of the aged to cope with living situations. Recommended preparation: Nutrition major or consent of instructor.
NTRN 441	Human Lactation	3 Units	This course explores the complexities and importance of human milk and breastfeeding. Using lectures, group discussion, and experiential learning we will explore the following topics: nutrition and development in the breastfeeding infant/mother dyad; the physiology of breastfeeding; maternal and infant disease states and their effects on breastfeeding; common pathologies in breastfeeding; pharmacology and breastfeeding; psychological, social, and cultural issues and breastfeeding; clinical skills and techniques in advising the breastfeeding mother; public health, ethical, and legal issues in breastfeeding and breastfeeding advocacy; current research topics in breast milk and breastfeeding; and options for certification in lactation education. Prereq: NTRN 363 or NTRN 433 or NTRN 401 or Requisites Not Met permission.
NTRN 446	Advanced Maternal Nutrition: Special Topics	3 Units	Analysis of the problems commonly associated with high-risk pregnancies and fetal outcome. Discussion of causes, mechanisms, management and current research. Recommended preparation: NTRN 435 or consent.
NTRN 448	Integrative and Functional Nutrition	3 Units	An examination of the core concepts and principles surrounding integrative and functional medical nutrition therapy (IFMNT). The course will emphasize a whole systems approach to addressing clinical imbalances and creating personalized therapeutic interventions based upon an individual's genetics, environment and lifestyle. Topics include precision medicine, IFMNT nutrition care plan processes, IFMNT laboratory tests and interpretation, dietary supplementation, and discussion of the evidence for integrative therapeutic nutrition/diet plans related to the gut microbiome/gastrointestinal disorders, food sensitivity/intolerance, methylation, immune function, detoxification, cardiometablic intervention, energy, hormones, and wellness.
NTRN 451	Food Service Systems Management	3 Units	The application of organizational theory and skills in the preparation and service of quantity food. Laboratory experience in professional food services are included. Graduate students will analyze one aspect of food service management in depth.  Offered as NTRN 351 and NTRN 451. Prereq: Nutrition major.
NTRN 452	Nutritional Biochemistry and Metabolism	3 Units	Mechanisms of regulation of pathways of intermediary metabolism; amplification of biochemical signals; substrate cycling and use of radioactive and stable isotopes to measure metabolic rates. Recommended preparation: BIOC 307 or equivalent. Offered as BIOC 452 and NTRN 452.
NTRN 454	Advanced Nutrition and Metabolism: Investigative Methods	3 Units	Lecture/discussion course on the use of analytical techniques in metabolic research on whole body metabolism, energy balance, and disease (diabetes, obesity, and neuropathologies);  discussions include the design of in-vitro and in-vivo investigative protocols in humans and animals using stable isotope tracer and mass spectrometric analysis; critical interpretation of data from the literature with emphasis on metabolic pathway identification, regulation and kinetics. Recommended preparation: BIOC 407.
NTRN 455	Molecular Nutrition	3 Units	Students will gain in-depth understanding of the basic science and translational aspects of `hot topics' in current molecular nutrition. Class will be conducted by interactive discussion of assigned primary research articles. Prereq: BIOC 407 or Requisites Not Met permission.
NTRN 456	Pediatric Obesity	3 Units	This is an upper-level, discussion- and case-based course. This course will examine the epidemiology, potential causes, assessment, and treatment of pediatric obesity. Special topics from the current pediatric obesity literature will also be covered. This course has a large discussion component and incorporates weekly readings from the scientific literature. Class sessions take place via synchronous, web-based video conferencing with additional asynchronous video lectures and course work each week. Prereq: MS student in Nutrition or Requisites Not Met permission.
NTRN 459	Diabetes Prevention and Management	3 Units	In this course, we will explore the diabetes epidemic, its effects on the healthcare system, and strategies for prevention. The pathophysiology of the disease will be examined as well as environmental factors leading to the increase in diagnoses. Comorbid conditions and acute and chronic complications of diabetes and hyperglycemia will be addressed. Rationale for current therapeutic strategies will be explored, including the use of blood glucose monitoring, physical activity, nutrition counseling, oral medications, and insulin therapy. Patient education and health literacy will be studied in the context of patient centered goal setting. Requirements for developing a Diabetes Self-Management Education Program will be discussed. Community program development will be examined in the context of population-based prevention strategies. Prereq: Graduate Standing.
NTRN 460	Sports Nutrition	3 Units	Study of the relationships of nutrition and food intake to body composition and human performance. Laboratory sessions include demonstrations of body composition and fitness measurements and participation in a research project. Recommended preparation: NTRN 363 or NTRN 433 or consent.
NTRN 461	Metabolic Dysregulation of Energy from Obesity to Anorexia	3 Units	Energy imbalance and the implications on health will be explored in this course. Key concepts covered in this class include: 1. Energy imbalance refers to positive and negative states of energy balance and occurs when energy intake does not match energy expended in metabolic processes, daily living activities, and physical activity; 2. Obesity is a result of chronic positive energy balance whereas anorexia nervosa is a condition of chronic negative energy balance; 3. Energy metabolism is controlled by a complex array of neural and hormonal signaling;  4. Energy imbalance disrupts the neural and hormonal signaling pathways of energy metabolism resulting in unfavorable health consequences such as pro-inflammatory state, oxidative stress, immune dysregulation, menstrual dysfunction, sarcopenia, and low bone mineral density; and 5. Exercise training can impact energy imbalance health-related outcomes.  Learning Outcomes: Students will be able to 1. define energy balance and explain the components of energy expenditure; 2. define disordered eating, female athlete triad, and disordered eating;  3. explain the relationship among energy intake, energy expenditure, and body composition in energy imbalance; 4. describe alterations in skeletal muscle and adipose physiology in energy imbalance; 5. diagram neural control of feeding and energy homeostasis and hormonal control of energy metabolism; 6. explain the neural and hormonal changes that occur in chronic energy imbalance and describe current theories in how it results in menstrual dysfunction, inflammatory response, oxidative stress, immune dysregulation, sarcopenia, and low bone mineral density; and 7. explain how exercise training can influence inflammatory response, oxidative stress, immune function, and musculoskeletal health in energy imbalance. Offered as NTRN 361 and NTRN 461. Prereq: NTRN 201 or requisites not met permission.
NTRN 462	Exercise Physiology and Macronutrient Metabolism	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to provide students with the knowledge of theoretical and applied concepts of exercise physiology. Students will gain an understanding of the acute and chronic physiological responses and adaptations of the cardiovascular, metabolic, hormonal, and neuromuscular systems in response to exercise.  Additional topics include factors effecting performance, assessing cardiorespiratory and muscular fitness, designing exercise programs for health and wellness, special populations, and athletes, environmental considerations and nutrition's role in sport and exercise performance. Offered as NTRN 362 and NTRN 462. Prereq: Nutrition Major.
NTRN 470A	Nutrient Drug Interactions: Introduction	1 Unit	We rely on the gastrointestinal system for processing not only food and beverages but also drugs. The mass of ingested food (100's of grams) exceeds that of most drugs (a few mg) by 10,000-fold or more. Nutrients and drugs follow similar processes through absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion. Nutritional state is also a powerful determinant of drug action. Drugs have potent effects on nutritional status. Conversely, nutrition modifies the action of drugs. Herbal supplements and functional foods have properties of both foods and drugs, but are regulated by the FDA as foods. Flavonoids from foods have mild medicinal properties and interact with multiple drug metabolizing pathways.  Current teaching around nutrient-drug interactions consists almost entirely of listings of potential interactions, or interactions that have been reported in humans as seldom as a single instance. Fortunately, most nutrient drug interactions are not dangerous and have a low potential for seriousness. Clinical impact is great only for those drugs with a low therapeutic index, meaning that the threshold concentration for toxicity is close to the concentration needed for therapeutic efficacy. To identify these potentially life-threatening interactions, health care professionals should learn more about the principles of pharmacology.  Electrolyte imbalances such as high or low plasma levels of potassium, magnesium and calcium are a common side effect of frequently prescribed medications. The role of nutrition habits and preferences in the incidence and severity of these side effects is not known. NTRN 452 is recommended but not required. Prereq: Graduate standing.
NTRN 470B	Nutrient Drug Interactions: Pharmacology	1 Unit	Foods affect every stage of drug kinetics from dissolution of tablets and capsules, through absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion. Nutritional state is also a powerful determinant of drug action. Herbal supplements and functional foods have properties of both foods and drugs, but are regulated by the FDA as foods. Flavonoids from foods have mild medicinal properties and interact with multiple drug metabolizing pathways.   Current teaching around nutrient-drug interactions consists almost entirely of listings of potential interactions, or interactions that have been reported in humans as seldom as a single instance. Fortunately, most nutrient drug interactions are not dangerous and have a low potential for seriousness. Clinical impact is great only for those drugs with a low therapeutic index, meaning that the threshold concentration for toxicity is close to the concentration needed for therapeutic efficacy. To identify these potentially life-threatening interactions, dieticians and other health care professionals should learn more about the principles of pharmacology. Prereq: Graduate standing and NTRN 470A.
NTRN 470C	Nutrient Drug Interactions: Clinical Applications	1 Unit	The clinical management of patients and clients must integrate pharmacoetherapeutics with nutrition based care plans. Drugs can affect nutritional needs and conversely nutrition can modify the efficacy of drugs. Disease states modify the actions of both nutrients and drugs as well as their interactions. Distinct nutrient-drug interactions are prominent in different patient populations. NTRN 452 is recommended but not required. Prereq: Graduate standing and NTRN 470A.
NTRN 516	Seminar in Dietetics I	3 Units	Study of evidence-based guidelines for dietetic practice in medical nutrition therapy. Emphasis on life cycle stages and common disease states that require specialized nutrition care. Enrollment restricted to those accepted into Case Coordinated Dietetic Internship/Master Degree Program.
NTRN 517	Seminar in Dietetics II	3 Units	Study of scientific basis for clinical and community nutrition practice and developments in food service systems management. Recommended preparation: Dietetic internship.
NTRN 528	Introduction to Public Health Nutrition	3 Units	An introduction to the field of public health/community nutrition with a focus on three key themes: (1) The role of nutrition in population based health, (2) the multilevel nature of key influences on dietary behavior, and (3) skills needed to be a successful public health practitioner. Prereq: Graduate Student in Nutrition or Public Health Nutrition or Requisites Not Met permission.
NTRN 529	Nutritional Epidemiology	3 Units	Poor diet is the leading risk factor for death worldwide, with approximately 1 in 5 deaths being linked to poor diet quality, underscoring the importance of research methods to examine the linkage between diet and disease. This course is designed to introduce students to key concepts and methods in Nutritional Epidemiology in the design, analysis, and critical evaluation of population-based nutrition research. There will be a focus on dietary assessment methodology and nutritional epidemiological research methods. Students will gain an understanding of the skills needed to design, analyze, interpret and critically evaluate population-based nutrition research focusing on the relationship between diet and chronic diseases.
NTRN 530	Public Health Nutrition	3 Units	Exploration of the professional role of the Public Health Dietitian/Nutritionist with a focus on three key themes: (1) The conduct of research and interpretation of research findings related to public health nutrition; (2) development of skills in the domains of public health management, program design and implementation, and communications and marketing; and (3) approaches to thinking about public health more broadly through the use of entrepreneurship and community building. Prereq: Graduate Student in Nutrition or Public Health Nutrition or Requisites Not Met permission.
NTRN 531	Public Health Nutrition Field Experience	1 - 6 Units	Individually planned public health experience. May be concurrent with course work in local agencies or in blocks of full-time work with a city, county, or state health agency. Prereq: Open to public health nutrition students only. Consent of instructor.
NTRN 532C	Specialized Public Health Nutrition Field Experience	1 - 3 Units	Individually arranged clinical experience. Prereq: Public Health Nutrition students only. Consent of instructor.
NTRN 533	Nutritional Care of Neonate	3 Units	Nutritional assessment and management of high-risk newborns with emphasis on prematurity and low birth weight. Review of current literature coordinated with remote, synchronous lectures and class discussions. Issues on follow-up included. Recommended preparation: NTRN 435 or consent.
NTRN 534	Advanced Public Health Nutrition Field Experience	1 - 6 Units	Individually planned advanced public health experience. Prereq: Open to public health nutrition students only.
NTRN 550A	Advanced Community Nutrition	3 Units	An introduction to the field of public health/community nutrition with a focus on three key themes: (1) The role of nutrition in population based health, (2) the multilevel nature of key influences on dietary behavior, and (3) skills needed to be a successful public health practitioner. Prereq: Senior Nutrition major or Requisites Not Met permission.
NTRN 551	Seminar in Advanced Nutrition	1 Unit	Ph.D. students meet weekly to discuss topical journal articles. Students gain experience in critical evaluation of research and develop presentation/communication skills. Discussion of research integrity and ethics. Students participate in departmental seminars with invited speakers.
NTRN 559	Seminar in Diabetes	Advanced Concepts and Current Trends	3 Units	This course is designed for students wishing to gain additional knowledge in diabetes management, beyond the basic concepts covered in NTRN 459.  In the first half of this course, students will explore advanced concepts in diabetes prevention and management including population-based prevention strategies, diagnosis and treatment of atypical forms of diabetes, emerging theories related to the root and contributing cause(s) of type 1 and type 2 diabetes, the use of technology to manage blood glucose (CGMs, closed loop systems, apps, etc), management of complications, and therapies in development and/or under investigation. The second half of the course will cover current concepts of interest to the students, in seminar form. Students will identify topics of interest as a group and then students will individually (with instructor assistance) identify and lead the discussion of a paper related to one of the concepts. Examples of topics include but are not limited to diabetes during pregnancy, role of the gut microbiome in DM development and management, pancreas and islet cell transplantation, and COVID-19 and the development of T2D. Prereq: NTRN 459 and Graduate Student standing.
NTRN 561	Investigative Methods in Nutrition	1 - 4 Units	Research methods appropriate for nutrition. Methods for conducting research in nutrition and food sciences, food service management and dietetics. Designing research proposals. Prereq: Nutrition major.
NTRN 562	Research Practicum	1 - 4 Units	Students will participate in nutrition-related research activities that employ a variety of research methodologies (clinical research, bench science, surveys, systematic reviews, etc.).  Students will be engaged in the acquisition of scientific data, and data entry, analysis and interpretation.
NTRN 601	Special Problems	1 - 18 Units	
NTRN 602	Special Project in Nutrition	1 - 3 Units	Under the supervision of the instructor, the student will develop and/or implement an individual or group special project in global nutrition, community nutrition, wellness, or other area of food and nutrition practice. Prereq: Graduate Standing.
NTRN 610	Oxygen and Physiological Function	1 Unit	Lecture/discussion course which explores the significance and consequences of oxygen and oxygen metabolism in living organisms. Topics to be covered include oxygen transport by blood tissues, oxygen toxicity, and mitochondrial metabolism. Emphasis will be placed on mammalian physiology with special reference to brain oxidative metabolism and blood flow as well as whole body energy expenditure and oxidative stress related to disease.  The course will cover additional spans of physiology, nutrition and anatomy. Offered as ANAT 610, NTRN 610, and PHOL 610.
NTRN 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
NTRN 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
OPRE 207	Statistics for Business and Management Science I	3 Units	Organizing and summarizing data.  Mean, variance, moments.  Elementary probability, conditional probability. Commonly encountered distributions including binomial. Poisson, uniform, exponential, normal distributions.  Central limit theorem.  Sample quantities, empirical distributions.  Reference distributions (chi-square, z-, t-, F-distributions).  Point and interval estimation: hypothesis tests. Prereq: MATH 121 or MATH 125.
OPRE 301	Operations Research and Supply Chain Management	3 Units	Operations research (OR) or management science, is the discipline of applying advanced quantitative methods to make better decisions.  Techniques covered include linear programming, queuing models and simulation.  The second part of the course focuses on how OR tools are used in managing various aspects of Supply Chain.  Topics covered include demand forecasting, design of distribution systems, capacity planning, and inventory management.  Recommended preparation: one semester of statistics or consent of instructor. Prereq: OPRE 207.
OPRE 332A	Spreadsheet and Business Process Simulation - I	1.5 Unit	Computer simulation is a process of designing and creating a computer model (vedio game) that mimics an existing or proposed system so as to better understand the behavior of the system. Many studies have shown that in industry, simulation is most frequently used Operations Research tool due to its ability to deal with complex systems. Another reason for the recent popularity of simulation is the availability of specialized software with animation capabilities. This course is designed to give students basic ideas of simulation methodology with the aid of popular simulation software. The emphasis of the course is in simulating business processes, however, the versatility of the technique will be demonstrated with applications from finance, health care, etc. The main focus of the course is on building simulation models using state of the art software (@RISK and ARENA). The grading is based on weekly homework and final exam. Offered as OPRE 332A, OPRE 432A, and SCMG 432A. Prereq: OPRE 301.
OPRE 332B	Spreadsheet and Business Process Simulation - II	1.5 Unit	Computer simulation is a process of designing and creating a computer model (video game) that mimics an existing or proposed system so as to better understand the behavior of the system. Many studies have shown that in industry, simulation is most frequently used Operations Research tool due to its ability to deal with complex systems. Another reason for the recent popularity of simulation is the availability of specialized software with animation capabilities. This course is designed to give students basic ideas of simulation methodology with the aid of popular simulation software. The emphasis of the course is in simulating business processes, however, the versatility of the technique will be demonstrated with applications from finance, health care, etc. This course builds on 332A/432A (where the main emphasis was to build simulation model using @RISK and ARENA) and focuses on statistical ideas and tools needed in building, analyzing and experimenting with these models. Offered as OPRE 332B, OPRE 432B, and SCMG 432B Prereq: OPRE 301. Prereq or Coreq: OPRE 332A.
OPRE 427	Convexity and Optimization	3 Units	Introduction to the theory of convex sets and functions and to the extremes in problems in areas of mathematics where convexity plays a role.  Among the topics discussed are basic properties of convex sets (extreme points, facial structure of polytopes), separation theorems, duality and polars, properties of convex functions, minima and maxima of convex functions over convex set, various optimization problems. Offered as MATH 327, MATH 427, and OPRE 427. Prereq: MATH 223 or consent of instructor.
OPRE 432A	Spreadsheet and Business Process Simulation - I	1.5 Unit	Computer simulation is a process of designing and creating a computer model (vedio game) that mimics an existing or proposed system so as to better understand the behavior of the system. Many studies have shown that in industry, simulation is most frequently used Operations Research tool due to its ability to deal with complex systems. Another reason for the recent popularity of simulation is the availability of specialized software with animation capabilities. This course is designed to give students basic ideas of simulation methodology with the aid of popular simulation software. The emphasis of the course is in simulating business processes, however, the versatility of the technique will be demonstrated with applications from finance, health care, etc. The main focus of the course is on building simulation models using state of the art software (@RISK and ARENA). The grading is based on weekly homework and final exam. Offered as OPRE 332A, OPRE 432A, and SCMG 432A. Prereq: MBAP 403 or MBAC 511.
OPRE 432B	Spreadsheet and Business Process Simulation - II	1.5 Unit	Computer simulation is a process of designing and creating a computer model (video game) that mimics an existing or proposed system so as to better understand the behavior of the system. Many studies have shown that in industry, simulation is most frequently used Operations Research tool due to its ability to deal with complex systems. Another reason for the recent popularity of simulation is the availability of specialized software with animation capabilities. This course is designed to give students basic ideas of simulation methodology with the aid of popular simulation software. The emphasis of the course is in simulating business processes, however, the versatility of the technique will be demonstrated with applications from finance, health care, etc. This course builds on 332A/432A (where the main emphasis was to build simulation model using @RISK and ARENA) and focuses on statistical ideas and tools needed in building, analyzing and experimenting with these models. Offered as OPRE 332B, OPRE 432B, and SCMG 432B Prereq: MBAP 403 or MBAC 511.  Prereq or Coreq: OPRE 432A.
OPRE 433	Statistical Data Analytics for Supply Chain	3 Units	Data of many kinds are typically available in practice, but the challenge is to use those data to make effective professional decisions.  This software-intensive course begins with useful descriptions of data and the probability theory foundation on which statistics rests.  It continues to statistics, including the central limit theorem, which explains why data often appear to be normally distributed, and the Palm-Khintchine theorem which explains why data often appear to have a Poisson distribution.  The remainder of the course focuses on regression and forecasting, including detecting and overcoming some of the deadly sins of regression, and the surprising flexibility of regression models.  Recommended preparation: One semester of undergraduate calculus or consent of instructor. Offered as OPRE 433 and SCMG 433.
OPRE 454	Analysis of Algorithms	3 Units	This course covers fundamental topics in algorithm design and analysis in depth. Amortized analysis, NP-completeness and reductions, dynamic programming, advanced graph algorithms, string algorithms, geometric algorithms, local search heuristics. Offered as CSDS 410 and OPRE 454. Prereq: OPRE 435A and OPRE 435C.
OPRE 490	Independent Study in Operations Research	1 - 15 Units	This course is offered, with permission, to students undertaking reading in a field of special interest.
OPRE 501	Special Problems and Topics	1 - 36 Units	This course is offered, with permission, to students undertaking reading in a field of special interest.
OPMT 350	Project Management	3 Units	Project management is concerned with the management and control of a group of interrelated tasks required to be completed in an efficient and timely manner for the successful accomplishment of the objectives of the project. Since each project is usually unique in terms of task structure, risk characteristics and objectives, the management of projects is significantly different from the management of repetitive processes designed to produce a series of similar products or outputs. Large-scale projects are characterized by a significant commitment of organizational and economic resources coupled with a high degree of uncertainty. The objective of this course is to enhance the ability of participants to respond to the challenges of large-scale projects so that they can be more effective as project managers. We study in detail up-to-date concepts, models, and techniques useful for the evaluation, analysis, management, and control of projects. Offered as OPMT 350, OPMT 450 and SCMG 450. Prereq: OPRE 301.
OPMT 377A	Business Forecasting	1.5 Unit	This course introduces nonmathematical managers to the major quantitative models designed for sound demand and system forecasting in today's complex and increasingly uncertain supply chains. Topics will also include reliability of historical data sets to forecast future patterns. The course will also cover non-quantitative tools to forecast demand for new products, services and technologies when historical data are not readily available. Emphasis is placed on a general understanding of theory, mechanics, application potential, available software packages, and templates. Offered as OPMT 377A, OPMT 477A and SCMG 477A. Prereq: OPRE 207 and OPRE 301.
OPMT 377B	Enterprise Resource Planning in the Supply Chain	1.5 Unit	Enterprise resource planning is the dominant system by which companies translate the needs from their customers into the detailed plans that the company must perform to meet the customer needs, and the resulting support the company will need from its suppliers. As such, it is a central player in the process of supply chain management. In this course, we study both the quantitative and qualitative concepts and techniques to help manage a company's operations to perform these important translation and planning tasks in order to help the company be successful. A major emphasis during the course is the design of processes and procedures (algorithms) for solving very complex (wicked) problems as a part of both class discussions and while working on case studies, as well as critiquing the designs so as to clearly understand their limitations. Offered as OPMT 377B, OPMT 477B, and SCMG 477B Prereq or Coreq: OPMT 377A.
OPMT 412	Lean Services Operations	3 Units	The course will be delivered over four modules: 1) Service Process Blueprints, 2) Managing Capacity in Service Systems, 3) Mapping the Value Stream (current and future state), and 4) Inventory Management in Service Systems. The topics considered are viewed in the context of healthcare management, financial services, insurance firms, call centers, back-office operations, and other applications.   Through these topics, the participants will be trained in tools that help them understand customers' expectations and needs and to identify service system characteristics that can meet these needs. We will learn how to identify errors in service and troubleshoot these problems by identifying the root causes of errors. Subsequently, we will discuss how one can modify the product or service design so as to prevent defects from occurring. Finally, we will establish performance metrics that help evaluate the effectiveness of the Lean system in place. These efforts will result to improved quality.   This course is not oriented toward specialists in service management. Its goal is to introduce you to the environments and help you appreciate the problems that operations managers are confronted with. Then, we will typically discuss some system specifics and emphasize the principles and issues that play key role in their management.  Offered as HSMC 412 and OPMT 412.
OPMT 420	Experiential Learning with Six Sigma Green Belt	3 Units	The Six Sigma process is the standard for quality improvement in organizations around the globe. In this course, we study the details of the five steps in the Six Sigma process: DEFINE, MEASURE, ANALYZE, IMPROVE, and CONTROL (DMAIC). Many tools, concepts, and processes that are often an integral part of Six Sigma projects in companies are included in the course content. They range from the very basic tools of quality (such as cause-and-effect diagrams for brainstorming) to complete processes (such as benchmarking, quality function deployment, failure mode and effects analysis-FMEA). Statistical concepts with software applications that are central to Six Sigma including statistical process control and introduction to design of experiments are also included. Once the Six Sigma process and its various components are understood, we study quality management including quality control, quality planning, quality improvement, strategic quality management, and quality strategy. A major requirement of the course is an action learning component in which the students are assigned in groups to work on unpaid real projects of Six Sigma in local industries. Students meeting the required standards of performance will earn a Green Belt Certification in Six Sigma and Quality Management from the Weatherhead School of Management. Offered as OPMT 420 and SCMG 420. Prereq: (SCMG/MSOR 433 or OPRE 433 or MBAC 511 or MBAP 403 or HSMC 457).  Prereq or Coreq: (SCMG/MSOR 406 or MBAP 408 or MBAC 507 or HSMC 412) or Requisites Not Met permission.
OPMT 422	Lean Operations	3 Units	In this course, students will be taught how to identify inefficiencies associated with overproduction, waiting, transport, extra processing, inventory, motion and defects. One-by-one, areas of inefficiencies are to be identified and improved while educating the workforce towards continual improvement. Similarly, participants will be trained to reduce lead times in areas such as engineering design, order entry, purchasing, order fulfillment, receiving, production, packaging, shipping, invoicing and collection. The above improvements will lead to cost reductions. Students will be trained in costing techniques, target pricing, and cost maintenance. The course will be delivered along the following themes: 1) Mapping the Value Stream (current and future state) 2) Workplace Organization: 5S & Safety, 3) Defect Reduction and Error Proofing, 4) Quick Changeover,  5) Standard Operations, 6) Total Productive Maintenance, 7) Visual management, 8) One-piece flow, 9) Lean Metrics. This course is not oriented toward specialists in operations management. Its goal is to introduce you to the environments and help you appreciate the problems that operations managers are confronted with and the key issues in their management. Offered as OPMT 422 and SCMG 422. Prereq: Not available to Master of Supply Chain Management students.
OPMT 450	Project Management	3 Units	Project management is concerned with the management and control of a group of interrelated tasks required to be completed in an efficient and timely manner for the successful accomplishment of the objectives of the project. Since each project is usually unique in terms of task structure, risk characteristics and objectives, the management of projects is significantly different from the management of repetitive processes designed to produce a series of similar products or outputs. Large-scale projects are characterized by a significant commitment of organizational and economic resources coupled with a high degree of uncertainty. The objective of this course is to enhance the ability of participants to respond to the challenges of large-scale projects so that they can be more effective as project managers. We study in detail up-to-date concepts, models, and techniques useful for the evaluation, analysis, management, and control of projects. Offered as OPMT 350, OPMT 450 and SCMG 450. Prereq: MBAC 511 or MBAP 403 or HSMC 457 or HSMC 412 or Requisites Not Met permission.
OPMT 460	Supply Chain Strategy	1.5 Unit	Have you ever wondered what it takes to manage a successful supply chain? It all comes down to the right strategy. Supply Chain Management Strategy is the indispensable direction for managing a successful supply chain. This course reviews how organizational strategies can inform operations and supply chain strategies. Several cases in various industries are discussed to illustrate how businesses employ various supply chain business models to achieve higher efficiencies, better, quality, faster service, and subsequently promote business objectives. Offered as OPMT 460 and SCMG 460.
OPMT 470	Supply Chain Risk Management	1.5 Unit	A Supply Chain comprises firms, organizations, and individuals, linked through material, information, and financial flows, and whose activities enable products and services to be created and reach the consumers. Risk Management is the process of identifying risks, forecasting their impact, devising, mitigation strategies, and applying those strategies in anticipation or in response to adverse events. Supply Chain Risk Management (SCRM) is a set of solutions for identifying, measuring, preparing for, and mitigating adverse events in supply chains. As the widespread use of outsourcing is stretching supply chains further geographically and turning supply networks into intricate, global, and fragile webs, supply disruptions happen more frequently than ever and lead to substantial financial losses. A 2015 National Institute of Standards and Technology study concluded that "the likelihood that a manufacturing organization will not experience a supply chain disruption in a twenty-four month period is a mere 2%." According to research, firms that experienced supply glitches have suffered tremendous erosion in the shareholders' value (the abnormal return on stock of these companies was negative 40%). Disruptions are only one example of supply risks. From commodity price fluctuations to product adulteration, from cyber security to patent violations, from regulatory compliance to supplier bankruptcies, supply chains are rife with risks and opportunities if you know how to recognize and take advantage of them. In this course, you will learn the best industry practices and be exposed to the most current academic insights on SCRM. You will know the process for SCRM, a variety of well-known and emerging supply risks, and the unique challenges of managing each one. You will also learn advantages and disadvantages of different risk mitigation tools. You will take away a number of useful analysis tools that you can immediately apply at your job. You will know the terminology of the field, the definitions, and the "state of the art" techniques. By the end of the course, you will be able to evaluate companies' performance with respect to supply risk management, and you will be able to create, contribute to, and run a supply-risk management program at your company. Offered as OPMT 470 and SCMG 470.
OPMT 475	Global Supply Chain Logistics	3 Units	The course will attempt to achieve two objectives: (1) to develop your skills in solving specific types of logistics/supply chain problems, and (2) to improve your capabilities in dealing with unstructured problems of the type encountered by intermediate and top managers. Skill development is accomplished through lecturers, case studies, homework, and examinations. These skills are valuable for addressing specific problems where the given technology is useful in treating them. On the other hand, broader analytical skills are enhanced using case studies and class discussion, which allow problem solving to be placed in a larger context. Defining a framework for analysis, applying concepts and principles, and commenting on the analysis of others help to achieve the second objective. Of course, these objectives interplay throughout the course of study. Offered as OPMT 475 and SCMG 475. Prereq: (MBAP 408 or MBAC 507) and (MBAC 511 or MBAP 403) or Requisites Not Met permission.
OPMT 476A	Strategic Sourcing in Supply Chain	1.5 Unit	The primary purpose of the course is to provide a comprehensive introduction to supply issues in manufacturing and service organizations.  Procurement and supply management has evolved as a strategic function across various industries.  Recent volatility in commodity prices has further enhanced the challenges in procurement.  This course explores sourcing strategies in global supply chains to reduce cost and enhance the competitiveness of the firm.  This course will provide you with a framework for thinking about strategic sourcing and tools to procure commodities and services efficiently. Offered as OPMT 476A and SCMG 476A. Prereq: Not available to Master of Supply Chain Management students.
OPMT 477A	Business Forecasting	1.5 Unit	This course introduces nonmathematical managers to the major quantitative models designed for sound demand and system forecasting in today's complex and increasingly uncertain supply chains. Topics will also include reliability of historical data sets to forecast future patterns. The course will also cover non-quantitative tools to forecast demand for new products, services and technologies when historical data are not readily available. Emphasis is placed on a general understanding of theory, mechanics, application potential, available software packages, and templates. Offered as OPMT 377A, OPMT 477A and SCMG 477A. Prereq: MBAC 511 or MBAP 403 or requisites not met permission.
OPMT 477B	Enterprise Resource Planning in the Supply Chain	1.5 Unit	Enterprise resource planning is the dominant system by which companies translate the needs from their customers into the detailed plans that the company must perform to meet the customer needs, and the resulting support the company will need from its suppliers. As such, it is a central player in the process of supply chain management. In this course, we study both the quantitative and qualitative concepts and techniques to help manage a company's operations to perform these important translation and planning tasks in order to help the company be successful. A major emphasis during the course is the design of processes and procedures (algorithms) for solving very complex (wicked) problems as a part of both class discussions and while working on case studies, as well as critiquing the designs so as to clearly understand their limitations. Offered as OPMT 377B, OPMT 477B, and SCMG 477B Prereq or Coreq: OPMT 477A.
OPMT 478	Operational Excellence	3 Units	This course focuses on the essence, principles, and practices of total quality management (TQM) and Operational Excellence.  Students learn management issues of identifying, analyzing, and implementing improvement projects in organizations. Topics are mostly non-quantitative with a focus on challenging aspects of quality management that students need to know beyond green belt certification such as learning to see processes better, defining quality ethically, analyzing side effects of change, and leading Kaizen, benchmarking, and brainstorming sessions. The course involves a rigorous real-world project of continuous improvement. Students will also have an opportunity to visit a local plant to get hands on experience with a real Kaizen event. Several guest talks are also scheduled to invite Black Belt professionals to discuss their experiences with quality management in Supply Chain. Offered as OPMT 478 and SCMG 478. Prereq: OPMT 420 or IIME 440.
OPMT 480	Blockchain Technology in Supply Chain Management	1.5 Unit	This course is intended to provide students with a grounding in blockchain basic concepts to enable them to understand potential applications within the supply chain. As the technology continues to develop and evolve, new use cases will emerge. Supply chain leaders need to know the capabilities offered by blockchain along with the potential risks and challenges associated with blockchain's use and implementation. Students will connect with real world organizations that are pushing ahead with the technology as a way to show its potential. Offered as OPMT 480 and SCMG 480.
OPMT 491	Revenue Management	3 Units	This course will focus on the theories and applications of data techniques to analyze demand models, and use optimization techniques to inform strategic decision making upon pricing and revenue management problems. The key ingredients of the class include the use of sophisticated data and optimization tools towards: - Mastering static and dynamic demand models - Understanding consumer choice behaviors - Understanding and formulating firm policies based on price response - Creating optimization toolkits for organizational decision making - Understanding and formulating competitive response The course is "tools agnostic" - you are welcome to use any of the available software packages (like MS Excel, Stata, SPSS) and programming languages (like R, Python or Matlab). Offered as OPMT 491 and SCMG 491. Prereq: OPRE 433 and OPRE 411.
OPMT 501	Special Problems and Topics	1 - 18 Units	This course is offered, with permission, to students undertaking reading in a field of special interest.
OMFS 501	Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology Seminar	1.5 Unit	Surgery and pathology are inextricably linked specialties and the oral and maxillofacial surgeon must be familiar with all aspects of pathology in order to provide optimal care for the patient presenting with oral or maxillofacial disease. These aspects include: knowing when/how to sample disease, being familiar with different types of tissue specimens and means of specimen transport, providing necessary information to the pathologist, understanding how to read a pathology report, knowing the impact of a diagnosis on patient management, and minimizing capacity for error. The most successful oral and maxillofacial surgeons possess a broad wealth of knowledge in this area and know when to engage their pathologist directly- outside of the traditional requisition from/pathology report means of communication- in order to successfully manage even the most challenging patient presentations. This course prepares OMFS residents for productive relationships with their pathologists through discussion of carefully selected cases.
OMFS 502	Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery Parameters of Care: A Review of the Contemporary and Classic Literature	1.5 Unit	This didactic course is designed as a contemporary and classic review of primary literature for Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery residents.  The literature review is based on the current published guidelines for clinical practice in Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery as described by the American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.   Throughout the course, key papers are reviewed that have influenced or directly impacted current techniques, treatment algorithms, and methodologies.  In accordance with the residents' clinical training, the full scope of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery is reviewed in this course including: Trauma Surgery, Surgical Correction of Maxillofacial Deformities, Patient Assessment, Anesthesia in Outpatient Facilities, Dentoalveolar Surgery, Dental Implant Surgery, TMJ, Diagnosis and Management of Pathologic Conditions, Reconstruction, Cleft and Craniofacial Surgery, and Cosmetic Maxillofacial Surgery.  An attempt is made to review specific topics at times during the academic year when the resident will most likely be participating in these types of cases.
OMFS 503	Surgical Case Presentation Conference	1.5 Unit	Collaboration provides an opportunity for ideas and knowledge to be shared. This course is designed for Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery residents of all levels to present operating room cases for the upcoming two weeks and share the decisions that were made to formulate the final treatment plans. While presenting the treatment plans the residents will discuss alternatives and the specific reasons why those plans were not chosen. With the input of faculty they will also share specific surgical techniques allowing residents to prepare to execute the upcoming surgical procedures. This course will help to educate the residents and prepare them to translate knowledge into improved operating room skills treating real patients.
OMFS 504	Basics Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery Conference	1.5 Unit	Collaboration provides an opportunity for ideas and knowledge to be shared. This course is designed for Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery residents of all levels to present timely and appropriate topics in Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. While presenting these topics, the residents will discuss the concepts and procedure relevant to the surgical topic. With the input from attending faculty they will also share specific surgical techniques allowing residents used to address the surgical procedure of the topic. This course will help to educate the residents and prepare them to translate knowledge into improved operating room skills treating surgical patients.
OMFS 505	Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Advanced Clinical Training	1.5 Unit	The didactic and clinical components of the oral and maxillofacial surgery (OMS) resident training program is designed to provide special knowledge and skills beyond the D.D.S training and oriented to the accepted standards of specialty practice as set forth in the Accreditation Standards for Advanced Specialty Education Programs. Resident progress to manage more complex surgical cases through an ongoing assessment process.  The four-year OMS training program provides a complete progressively graduated sequence of outpatient, inpatient and emergency room experiences. The focus of the first three months is to become orientated to the role and responsibilities of the OMS resident on the care of the hospitalized patient and ambulatory oral surgical services. Their development is closely supervised by senior level OMS residents and the attending OMS teaching faculty. As the residents develop competency in basic procedures in outpatient, inpatient and emergency room experiences, the level of supervision progresses from direct visual to directed as appropriate. The first-year resident will rotate to affiliated hospital where they are provided with opportunities for independent inpatient and outpatient care experiences without the presence of the senior level residents and a close direct relationship with the OMS attending faculty. As they gain experience and faculty confidence, they are given their own independent operating room responsibilities for anesthesia care with the Anesthesia faculty.  The Second year is devoted to Anesthesia training and progressing from full-time direct visual to direct visual supervision by the senior level anesthesia residents and Anesthesia faculty. The resident rotates through other surgical services such as a SICU and TRAUMA team.  The third year resident is given much more independence and responsibility. The fourth and final year rotation  of the OMS program, the resident is given increased responsibilities for patient care as they progress.  The senior OMS resident return to OMS service and gain more independence and responsibility for patient care as permitted by their capabilities and the decreasing activity of the graduating senior resident. The senior residents are quickly given increasing responsibility in outpatient, inpatient and emergency room experiences as they demonstrate competence to the OMS attending teaching faculty.
OMFS 694	Program Year I	1 - 3 Units	Interns are expected to take calls at UH and, where applicable, the Veteran's Administration (VA). After the initial two months at UH, one of the interns will begin a three-month rotation at the VA as the principal OMFS resident. Both rotations will give the intern experience in diagnosis, information-gathering, dentoaveolar surgery, and major surgery within the scope of OMFS. The last two months of the first year are spent on the UH Anesthesia service. The resident will be paired with an anesthesiology resident or attending, improving upon and learning procedures involving management of the medically-compromised patient, airway management, pharmacologic management, intravenous sedation and general anesthesia. Formal conferences are held to advance the residents in oral and maxillofacial pathology, contemporary issues in OMFS, orthognathics, implantology and anesthetic principles, case presentation, and OMFS knowledge updates. As well, interns are second year medical students and take part in a full-year course in physical diagnosis.
OMFS 695	Program Year II	1 - 3 Units	Students must complete 40 weeks of basic core clerkships through the academic year: Family Medicine, Internal medicine, Aging, OB-GYN, Pediatrics, Neuroscience, Psychiatry, surgery, and emergency medicine.  They must complete 8 additional weeks of clinical electives, this may include a  OMFS rotation.
OMFS 696	Program Year III	1 - 3 Units	Interns are expected to take calls at UH and, where applicable, the Veteran's Administration (VA). After the initial two months at UH, one of the interns will begin a three-month rotation at the VA as the principal OMFS resident. Both rotations will give the intern experience in diagnosis, information-gathering, dentoaveolar surgery, and major surgery within the scope of OMFS. The last two months of the first year are spent on the UH Anesthesia service. The resident will be paired with an anesthesiology resident or attending, improving upon and learning procedures involving management of the medically-compromised patient, airway management, pharmacologic management, intravenous sedation and general anesthesia. Formal conferences are held to advance the residents in oral and maxillofacial pathology, contemporary issues in OMFS, orthognathics, implantology and anesthetic principles, case presentation, and OMFS knowledge updates. As well, interns are second year medical students and take part in a full-year course in physical diagnosis.
OMFS 697	Program Year IV	1 - 3 Units	Fourth-year residents are primarily off-service as general surgery interns. Residents rotate through plastic surgery, ENT surgery, general surgery, dermatological surgery, and trauma surgery at UH and MetroHealth hospital.
OMFS 698	Program Year V	1 - 3 Units	During this senior year, the resident returns to the OMFS service as chief for six months.  The chief resident is responsible for the resident service, working-up surgical cases and is typically the first assistant in major surgical cases.  During this time, the chief works closely with the AEGD residents to plan and perform surgery on simple and advanced implant cases.
DORL 529	Oral Diagnosis / Med Seminar	1 Unit	Principles of diagnosis of oral mucosal disorders , clinical pathology and systemic pathology will be discussed in an interactive, case based format.
DORL 531	Clinical Oral Diagnosis and Oral Medicine	1 Unit	Clinical rotation in oral medicine and orofacial pain service.
DORL 532	Medical Specialty Services	1 - 3 Units	This course provides exposure to the graduate student to medical primary and specialty services and applications to the practice of oral medicine.
DORL 533	Supervised Teaching Radiology	0 - 3 Units	Active supervision of first year students during pre clinical and didactic instruction in dental radiography. Instruct and guide DMD students accurately exposing, processing and evaluating patient complete mouth radiographic surveys in clinical and demonstrate basic acquisition and interpretation of CBCT scans
DORL 534	Panoramic Imaging	0 - 3 Units	Knowledge regarding principles of panoramic radiology and image formation, details of rotation center, image layer formation, image layer thickness, magnification, sharpness and sensor design movement and speed.  Anatomic landmarks key landmarks used for troubleshooting errors, description of correct projection of anatomic landmarks on a properly exposed panoramic film and relative positioning of anatomic structures is also covered.
DORL 541	Clinical Oral and Maxillofacial Radiology	1 Unit	Learn the principles of CBCT, MRI, and other advanced imaging Assist in oral and maxillofacial reading service Recognize radiologic appearance of abnormal findings in the maxillofacial complex
DORL 542	Advanced Oral Radiology	1 Unit	Seminar format review of advanced imaging techniques and interpretation on a one to one basis with faculty.
DORL 554	Current Concepts in Medicine	1 Unit	Students will review contemporary internal medicine topics of relevance to the oral medicine clinician.
ASTR 101	Introduction to the Sun and Its Planets	3 Units	This introductory astronomy course describes our solar system of planets and how astronomers develop our physical understanding about the universe. Topics include the properties of the Sun and planets; the formation of the solar system and how the planets have evolved over time; asteroids, comets, and dwarf planets; and a comparison of our solar system with new planetary systems being found around other stars. This course has no pre-requisites.
ASTR 103	Introduction to the Stars, Galaxies, and the Universe	3 Units	This introductory astronomy course describes the universe we live in and how astronomers develop our physical understanding about it. Topics covered include: the properties of stars; the formation, evolution, and death of stars; white dwarfs, pulsars, and black holes; spiral and elliptical galaxies; the Big Bang and the expansion of the Universe. This course has no pre-requisites.
ASTR 105	Introduction to Einstein's Universe	3 Units	This course is a descriptive introduction for the non-science major to Einstein's Special and General Theories of Relativity and how these theories have fundamentally altered our understanding of the universe. Topics discussed will include: time dilation, length contraction, the twin paradox, the warping of space-time, white dwarf stars, neutron stars, black holes, the structure and evolution of the universe. No mathematical background beyond simple algebra is needed. This course has no pre-requisites.
ASTR 107	Introduction to Life in the Universe	3 Units	This course is intended to introduce the non-scientist to the field of astrobiology - the interdisciplinary study of, and the search for, extraterrestrial life and the conditions for extraterrestrial life in the Universe. This course has no pre-requisites.
ASTR 151	Doing Astronomy	1 Unit	This course is intended to introduce students to how astronomy is done.  The course will focus on the astronomical research process, the scientific community, and on career paths in astronomy.  Course activities will include readings and class discussions focusing on various topics in modern astronomy, including ongoing research activity in the department.  This course is largely intended for first- and second-year students considering majoring or minoring in astronomy, or pursuing a career in astronomy. Prereq: First- or second-year academic standing.
ASTR 221	Stars and Planets	3 Units	Stellar structure and energy production.  Formation and evolution of stars.  Supernovae, neutron stars, and black holes. Star clusters.  Planetary systems and the detection of extrasolar planets.  The application of physical laws to the study of the universe. Prereq: MATH 122 or MATH 126.
ASTR 222	Galaxies and Cosmology	3 Units	The Milky Way Galaxy.  Structure, dynamics, and evolution of galaxies.  Galaxy clusters and large scale structure of the Universe.  Physical cosmology and the Big Bang.  Evolution of the Universe. Prereq: ASTR 221.
ASTR 306	Astronomical Techniques	3 Units	This course covers the techniques astronomers use to conduct research, including observations using ground-and space-based telescopes, computer simulations and other numerical methods, and statistical data mining of large on-line astronomical datasets.   Offered as ASTR 306 and ASTR 406. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: ASTR 222.
ASTR 309	Astrophysics Seminar I	1 Unit	Selected topics in astronomy not covered ordinarily in courses. Presentation of talks by the students. Prereq: ASTR 222 or Requisites Not Met permission.
ASTR 310	Astrophysics Seminar II	1 Unit	Selected topics in astronomy not covered ordinarily in courses. Presentation of talks by students. Prereq: ASTR 222 or Requisites Not Met permission.
ASTR 311	Stellar Physics	3 Units	Radiative transfer, atomic and molecular opacities, and the observable properties of stars. Stellar interiors, nuclear processes, and energy generation.  The evolution of stars of varying mass and production of the elements within supernovae explosions. Offered as ASTR 311 and ASTR 411. Prereq: ASTR 222.
ASTR 323	The Local Universe	3 Units	The Milky Way Galaxy.  Galaxy populations.  Quantitative structure and dynamics of galaxies.  The interstellar media of galaxies.  Dark matter and stellar populations.  The Local Group and Virgo cluster. Offered as ASTR 323 and ASTR 423. Prereq: ASTR 222.
ASTR 328	Cosmology and the Structure of the Universe	3 Units	Distances to galaxies.  The content of the distant universe. Large scale structure and galaxy clusters.  Physical cosmology.  Structure and galaxy formation and evolution.  Testing cosmological models. Offered as ASTR 328, PHYS 328, ASTR 428, and PHYS 428. Prereq: ASTR 222.
ASTR 333	Dark Matter	3 Units	This course will systematically explore the evidence for dark matter in the universe.  Necessary physical theory and astronomical concepts will be developed as appropriate. Topics to be covered include gravitational dynamics, gravitational lensing, and hydrostatic equilibrium as probes of the gravitational potentials of extragalactic systems.  Examples include the rotation curves of spiral galaxies, the Oort discrepancy in the local Galactic disk, the dynamics of pressure supported dwarf and giant elliptical galaxies, and the Local Group timing problem.  In clusters of galaxies, the mass discrepancy is illustrated separately by measured velocity dispersions, the hydrostatic equilibrium of the hot intracluster medium, and both strong and weak gravitational lensing.  On cosmic scales, the course will address evidence from the gravitating and baryonic mass content of the universe, the growth of large scale structure from the initially smooth cosmic microwave background, and the existence of large voids and large scale bulk flows.  The course will describe the various dark matter halo models commonly employed and introduce the techniques of mass modeling.  We will examine hypotheses for the nature of dark matter, both baryonic and non-baryonic, and discuss strategies for experimental detection of plausible dark matter candidates.  Theories that seek to explain the observed mass discrepancies by means of modifying the Law of Gravity rather than invoking dark matter will be explored. Offered as ASTR 333 and ASTR 433. Prereq: PHYS 310 or requisites not met permission.
ASTR 351	Astronomy Capstone Project	1 - 3 Units	In the Astronomy Capstone, students pursue scientific projects based on experimental, theoretical or pedagogical research under the supervision of an astronomy faculty member. Students will provide regular oral and written progress reports over the course of the project, and final results are presented in the form of a research paper (or other suitable technical report) as well as an oral summary presentation at a public symposium. For this course to satisfy the University's SAGES Capstone requirement, a total of three credit hours are needed. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: ASTR 222.
ASTR 369	Undergraduate Research	1 - 3 Units	Supervised research on topics of interest.  Can be used as a thesis course if desired.  Students may register more than once for a maximum of 9 credits overall (1-3 credits each semester).
ASTR 406	Astronomical Techniques	3 Units	This course covers the techniques astronomers use to conduct research, including observations using ground-and space-based telescopes, computer simulations and other numerical methods, and statistical data mining of large on-line astronomical datasets.   Offered as ASTR 306 and ASTR 406. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
ASTR 411	Stellar Physics	3 Units	Radiative transfer, atomic and molecular opacities, and the observable properties of stars. Stellar interiors, nuclear processes, and energy generation.  The evolution of stars of varying mass and production of the elements within supernovae explosions. Offered as ASTR 311 and ASTR 411.
ASTR 423	The Local Universe	3 Units	The Milky Way Galaxy.  Galaxy populations.  Quantitative structure and dynamics of galaxies.  The interstellar media of galaxies.  Dark matter and stellar populations.  The Local Group and Virgo cluster. Offered as ASTR 323 and ASTR 423.
ASTR 428	Cosmology and the Structure of the Universe	3 Units	Distances to galaxies.  The content of the distant universe. Large scale structure and galaxy clusters.  Physical cosmology.  Structure and galaxy formation and evolution.  Testing cosmological models. Offered as ASTR 328, PHYS 328, ASTR 428, and PHYS 428.
ASTR 433	Dark Matter	3 Units	This course will systematically explore the evidence for dark matter in the universe.  Necessary physical theory and astronomical concepts will be developed as appropriate. Topics to be covered include gravitational dynamics, gravitational lensing, and hydrostatic equilibrium as probes of the gravitational potentials of extragalactic systems.  Examples include the rotation curves of spiral galaxies, the Oort discrepancy in the local Galactic disk, the dynamics of pressure supported dwarf and giant elliptical galaxies, and the Local Group timing problem.  In clusters of galaxies, the mass discrepancy is illustrated separately by measured velocity dispersions, the hydrostatic equilibrium of the hot intracluster medium, and both strong and weak gravitational lensing.  On cosmic scales, the course will address evidence from the gravitating and baryonic mass content of the universe, the growth of large scale structure from the initially smooth cosmic microwave background, and the existence of large voids and large scale bulk flows.  The course will describe the various dark matter halo models commonly employed and introduce the techniques of mass modeling.  We will examine hypotheses for the nature of dark matter, both baryonic and non-baryonic, and discuss strategies for experimental detection of plausible dark matter candidates.  Theories that seek to explain the observed mass discrepancies by means of modifying the Law of Gravity rather than invoking dark matter will be explored. Offered as ASTR 333 and ASTR 433.
ASTR 497	Special Topics in Astronomy	1 - 3 Units	
ASTR 601	Research	1 - 18 Units	Original research under the guidance of the staff.
ASTR 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
ASTR 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
ORBH 250	Leading People (LEAD I)	3 Units	The principal goals of this course are to help students learn about the context in which managers and leaders function, gain self-awareness of their own leadership vision and values, understand the options they have for careers in management based on their own aptitudes, orientations and expertise, and develop the fundamental skills needed for success in a chosen career.  Through a series of experiential activities, assessment exercises, group discussions, and peer coaching, based on a model of self-directed learning and life-long development, the course helps students understand and formulate their own career and life vision, assess their skills and abilities, and design a development plan to reach their objectives.  The course enables students to see how the effective leadership of people contributes to organizational performance and the production of value, and how for many organizations, the effective leadership of people is the driver of competitive advantage. Credit for at most one of ORBH 250 and ORBH 396 can be applied to hours required for graduation. Prereq: At least sophomore standing.
ORBH 251	Leading Organizations (LEAD II)	3 Units	The principal goal of this course is to help students enhance their leadership skills by understanding how organizations function through the lenses of structure, culture, and power/politics. The course enables students to discern how leaders function effectively as they integrate goals, resources and people within these constraints.  Students learn about these organizational lenses while developing their own leadership and professional skills. Prereq: ORBH 250 or ORBH 396 and at least Sophomore standing.
ORBH 303	Developing Interpersonal Skills for Leading	3 Units	This course is designed for students who want to increase their understanding of interpersonal and team dynamics.  It is designed to help you to build more open and effective relationships and to improve your ability to cooperate with and lead others to work effectively in today's increasingly team-oriented organizations. The emphasis of this course is on learning about oneself in the context of others based on the here-and-now experience of the group. Prereq: At least sophomore standing.
ORBH 310	The Art and Science of High-Functioning Teams	3 Units	This is an introductory course on teamwork, in which students learn how to contribute to a team effectively, while being mindful of building meaningful human relationships. This is a key life skill for building and contributing to the teams that you will encounter as you pursue collective efforts at work, school, and in your home and community. Although teamwork is a ubiquitous part of our everyday lives, many of us know little about the strategy and psychology of effective teamwork. This course focuses on the art and science of integrating the efforts of diverse parties to produce meaningful collective outcomes. Understanding your own teamwork style and what drives others is essential for success in teamwork. This kind of knowledge can only be gained through experience and this course provides a series of simulations and debriefings that address a variety of influences and processes in teamwork. Each simulation has been chosen to highlight the central concepts that underlie the art and science of high-functioning teamwork.
ORBH 330	Quantum Leadership: Creating Value for You, Business, and the World	3 Units	This course is designed to help you develop your leadership skills and capabilities aimed at flourishing, defined as "to grow well, to prosper, to thrive, to live life to the fullest." It emphasizes the growing desire by people everywhere for greater purpose and well-being through practices that cultivate the self. The goal is changing who leaders are being, not only what they are doing, through daily practices that increase their awareness of how their actions impact others and the world. Through the course, students will learn mindfulness-type practices in an action learning process that allows them to experience a greater connection to self, others, and nature. Recent research shows that such direct-intuitive practices support personal well-being, team collaboration, and organizational resilience as part of an upward spiral in leadership effectiveness and life satisfaction. The most exciting aspect of this class is encouraging students to see themselves as positive change agents, with the ability to make a positive impact on the world through living their most fulfilling and flourishing selves.  Offered as ORBH 330 and ORBH 430.
ORBH 360	Independent Study	1 - 6 Units	This course is set up individually upon conference between student and Organizational Behavior faculty member designed in consult with the student's advisor if necessary in order to engage and challenge student with topics in organizational behavior.
ORBH 370	Navigating Gender in Organizations	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to prepare students to succeed in the workforce by understanding and exploring the opportunities and challenges of work across the lifespan and developing necessary skills to be effective. The course broadens understanding of gender dynamics and gendered structures in the workplace, intersections of gender with other identities, and the leadership and managerial issues affecting women and men in work organizations.  The course helps students create a personal framework for how to develop a successful, happy and integrated work life in the global economy. Offered as ORBH 370 and WGST 370. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ORBH 380	Managing Negotiations	3 Units	Negotiation is the art and science of securing agreements between two or more interdependent parties.  Negotiation skills are critical to influencing others and thus to effective leadership. The good news is that negotiation is a skill that can be developed. In this interactive course, you will learn how to be a more effective negotiator by learning about the theory and processes of negotiation, participating in negotiation simulations, reflecting on your own and others' negotiation experiences and completing assignments designed to help you hone your negotiation skills. This will be done through a variety of means, including: understanding the theory and processes of negotiation, participating in negotiation simulations, reflecting on your own and others' negotiation experiences and completing assignments designed to help you hone your negotiation skills. Prereq: At least sophomore standing.
ORBH 391	Leadership in Diversity and Inclusion: Towards a Globally Inclusive Workplace	3 Units	This course addresses workforce diversity issues from individual, group, and organizational perspectives. The focus is on innovative ways of utilizing today's culturally expanding workforce. Emphasis is on the "what and how" for managers in developing a corporate culture that embraces diversity, helping them in learning to work with, supervise and tap the talent of diverse employees within their organizations. Included are methods for modifying systems to attract, retain, develop, and capitalize on benefits of the new workforce demographics. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ORBH 396	Professional Development for Engineers	3 Units	The overall objective of this course is essentially to help you to learn, grow and change personally and professionally.  The course is designed to develop your self-awareness, leadership capability, relationship and collaboration skills. Specific learning objectives are:      1	Develop greater self-awareness around your core values, personal vision, career aspirations, strengths and emotional intelligence.  Deepening your self-knowledge and self-awareness on these dimensions is important for setting up your personal path to success. 2	Learn how people develop and grow through a process of intentional change.  You will personally apply this insight and create a plan to achieve your learning and development goals.  3	Learn about and experience the impact of personal and peer coaching.  Being able to develop, nurture and sustain positive developmental relationships at work is a hallmark of highly effective professionals. 4	Expand your capability to work effectively with a range of people in groups and teams.  Understanding and practicing effective communication, giving and receiving feedback and appreciating differences in others are key factors in working well with others. Credit for at most one of ORBH 250 and ORBH 396 can be applied to hours required for graduation. Prereq: Case School of Engineering majors only.
ORBH 403	Developing Interpersonal Skills for Managers	3 Units	This course is intended to sharpen students' skills in the art of relating successfully to other individuals and groups. The course uses an intensive group experience to make students more aware of how their actions affect others, more capable of giving and receiving interpersonal feedback, and more cognizant of processes through which groups work. Several Saturday classes.
ORBH 413	Economics of Negotiation and Conflict Resolution	3 Units	Students frequently enroll in a negotiation class with one thought in mind--negotiating a better job offer from an employer. They soon learn, however, that negotiation skills can do far more than improve a paycheck. Negotiations occur everywhere: in marriages, in divorces, in small work teams, in large organizations, in getting a job, in losing a job, in deal making, in decision making, in board rooms, and in court rooms. The remarkable thing about negotiations is that, wherever they occur, they are governed by similar principles. The current wave of corporate restructuring makes the study of negotiations especially important for M.B.A.s. Mergers, acquisitions, downsizing and joint ventures call into question well established business and employment relationships. Navigating these choppy waters by building new relationships requires the negotiation skills that you will learn in this class.  Offered as ECON 431 and ORBH 413.
ORBH 430	Quantum Leadership: Creating Value for You, Business, and the World	3 Units	This course is designed to help you develop your leadership skills and capabilities aimed at flourishing, defined as "to grow well, to prosper, to thrive, to live life to the fullest." It emphasizes the growing desire by people everywhere for greater purpose and well-being through practices that cultivate the self. The goal is changing who leaders are being, not only what they are doing, through daily practices that increase their awareness of how their actions impact others and the world. Through the course, students will learn mindfulness-type practices in an action learning process that allows them to experience a greater connection to self, others, and nature. Recent research shows that such direct-intuitive practices support personal well-being, team collaboration, and organizational resilience as part of an upward spiral in leadership effectiveness and life satisfaction. The most exciting aspect of this class is encouraging students to see themselves as positive change agents, with the ability to make a positive impact on the world through living their most fulfilling and flourishing selves.  Offered as ORBH 330 and ORBH 430.
ORBH 450	Executive Leadership	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to help students understand the current theories and effective practices of executive leadership, and through this understanding, to help enhance their own leadership practices and capabilities. We will examine the methods, challenges, trade-offs, and frontiers of executive leadership through application of leadership concepts to actual case studies.  Student teams will identify and conduct at-a-distance and in-depth projects studying executive leaders. The course aims at answering questions such as: Who are leaders?  Are leaders different from managers?  How do the most effective leaders think and act?  What are the recent trends in the practices of executive leadership? What competencies do leaders need to lead in a complex, global, and interdependent world?  What situations create leaders or foster their emergence?  How are leaders developed?  What makes us want to follow leaders?  How can executive leaders most effectively relate with their teams and stakeholders?  How do leaders engage positively with their authority, power, and influence? What are the personal costs of being a leader?
ORBH 451	Alternative Dispute Resolution	3 Units	Students will examine the processes of alternative dispute resolution (ADR) through reading materials, videotapes, guest lectures, and simulation exercises. Particular emphasis will be given to the interaction of lawyers and clients in business negotiations and in litigation. Negotiation, arbitration, mediation, and the mini-trial will be examined. The class will also cover impediments to ADR, such as lack of understanding or hostility on the part of clients or lawyers.
ORBH 460	Women in Organizations	3 Units	This course addresses important leadership and management issues concerning women in organizations.  The course provides complex understandings of issues pertinent to professional women and work such as sex role typing, sex-based discrimination, equal pay, sexual harassment, work-family balance, women's leadership and women's career issues and development. The course helps students increase self-knowledge about their own values and practices as well as enhance their capabilities as leaders and managers.  We will examine the opportunities, challenges, trade-offs, and organizational dynamics experienced by women in work settings, as well as the interpersonal, organizational, and societal structures and processes impacting women in organizations.  Through a variety of course methods, students gain greater awareness of the gendered nature of work and organizations and learn effective strategies for women's career progress and effective participation in organizations.
ORBH 501	Special Problems and Topics	1 - 18 Units	This course is offered, with permission, to students undertaking reading in a field of special interest.
ORBH 510	Organizational Behavior Department Seminar	1.5 Unit	The OB Department Seminar is organized and managed by the first year PhD students. Seminar sessions will alternate between first year meetings and gatherings of the ORBH community of students, faculty and friends.  Community sessions will be organized around research presentations of PhD Qualifying Papers, Dissertation Proposals and Dissertation Defense.  Seminar Objectives: 1. To create and sustain an appreciative, intellectually nourishing learning space for the ORBH community that will support, inspire and empower us to explore the frontiers of scholarship in our field; 2.To provide a forum for sharing the ongoing research and scholarship of the department; 3. To develop productive collaborative research relationships; 4. To increase our collective knowledge of the current state of the art in OB and to develop productive collaborative research relationships; 4. To increase our collective knowledge of the current state of the art in OB and related fields.
ORBH 511	Micro Organizational Behavior	1.5 Unit	Examines the field of micro-organizational behavior.  Specifically, the study of individuals and groups within an organizational context and the study of internal processes and practices as they affect individuals and groups.  Major topics include individual characteristics such as beliefs, values and personality.  Individual processes such as motivation, emotions, commitment, group and team processes, such as decision-making; organizational processes and practices such as goal setting, performance appraisal and rewards, and the influence of all of these on such individual, group and organizational outcomes as performance, job satisfaction, citizenship behaviors, turnover, justice, absenteeism and employee engagement.
ORBH 513	Appreciative Inquiry and Strength-Based Change	1.5 Unit	This course explores and develops the art of understanding social systems in ways that help us imagine, design and develop organization excellence. It seeks to show how many of our conventional ideas about organizations are based on discourse and metaphors that lead us to see and understand organizations in partial and often limiting ways. Growing research from the domains of Positive Psychology and Positive Organization Scholarship and the theory and practice of Appreciative Inquiry will be explored to show how we can create new and more positive, strength-based ways of designing and developing social systems.
ORBH 516	The Scholarship of Coaching	1.5 Unit	Coaching is a helping relationship in which one person assists another with change with respect to a person's behavior, attitudes, mental models, dreams of the future, etc. The popularity of the practice of coaching began to dramatically increase at least 20 years before scholars designed studies to test its efficacy.  In this course, we will examine scholarly work in the coaching domain that has emerged. Prereq: Limited to ORBH PhD students only.
ORBH 520	Group and Interpersonal Analysis	1.5 Unit	This course is a review of major concepts and research in group dynamics and interpersonal relations. Topics concern face-to-face social interaction such as communication patterns, power, hierarchy, leadership, norms, goals, productivity, social theories of personality, and personal change through group methods. The course combines cognitive emphasis and personal experience-based learning.
ORBH 523	Design for Sustainable Value	1.5 Unit	The relationship between business and society--and the search for mutually beneficial advances between industry and the world's most pressing global issues--has become one of the defining issues of the 21st century.  Throughout the world, immense entrepreneurial energy is finding expression, energy whose converging force is in direct proportion to the turbulence, crises, and the call of our times.  Factories and buildings are being designed in ways that, surprisingly, give back more clean energy to the world than they use.  Bottom-of-the-pyramid strategies and micro-enterprise models are demonstrating how business can eradicate poverty through profitability.  Companies are designing products that leave behind no waste--only "food" that becomes input into their biological or technological cycles.  And macrowikinomics--everything from telepresence to megacommunity--is rebooting our capacity for human cooperation and global action. Prereq: Limited to ORBH PhD students only.
ORBH 525	Leading Change from a Complexity Perspective	1.5 Unit	Change is an enigma and yet sustained, desirable change (SDC) drivers adaptation, growth and life itself.  In this course, we will continuously attempt to answer two questions: (1) What is the process of sustained, desirable change?  and (2) What is the role of a leader, including their emotional and social intelligence?  Concepts from complexity theory will be used, as well as case studies and longitudinal studies including understanding the multilevel nature of SDC at the individual, dyad, team, organization (including family business), community, country, and global levels.  Intentional Change Theory (ICT) will be used as the organizing concept for the changes studied. Prereq: Limited to ORBH PhD students only.
ORBH 528	The Dynamics of Managing Effective Change	1.5 Unit	This course explores and develops an understanding of how individuals actually effect positive change and outcomes within an organization without the requisite authority or decision making power to do so.  It seeks to show how managing a change process appears to follow a path of cumulative activities that in time produce a punctuated equilibrium--one that triggers a step up in performance.  Such activities seem to be small episodes or learning cycles geared at converting inert knowledge into action; increasing awareness; reinforcing accountability, and/or attaining results.  These findings will be compared and contrasted to existing change models and theories. Prereq: Limited to ORBH PhD students only.
ORBH 533	The Practice Turn in Organizational Research	1.5 Unit	In this course, doctoral students will develop an understanding of the role of practice and performativity in organizing.  This involves exploring the link between doing and thinking by and between individuals in an effort to address larger issues of group- and organizational-level behavior.  Students will examine elements of human behavior in organizational endeavors such as embodied cognition, and the enactment of structures and routines.  Methods of "capturing" practice in organizing will also be discussed.  By the end of the course, students will be expected to articulate how the practice perspective relates to their own research interests and future projects. Prereq: Limited to ORBH PhD students only.
ORBH 538	Research and Theory on Dynamical Behavior in Groups	1.5 Unit	This seminar exposes student to a variety of conversations in the study of group dynamics. Major topics include work on commons dilemmas, communal and exchange relationships, social facilitation, social loafing, social combination, and social creativity drawing deeply on our historical roots. It will also focus on current topical issues such as demographic faultlines, transactional memory, and issues of time and transition. Prereq: Limited to ORBH PhD students only.
ORBH 540	Social Exchange, Social Networks, and Social Capital in Organizations	1.5 Unit	In this course we will examine the nature of social exchange relationships in organizations.  We will explore how individual perceptions regarding the quality of the relationship they have with their immediate supervisor, their work group, and the organization as an entity can impact their workplace attitudes and behaviors.  Additionally, we will learn how the examination of networks of relationships can enhance our understanding of how individuals experience organizational life.  The course will also provide a brief introduction to the theory, methods and procedures of social network analysis with an emphasis on applications to individual and organizational social capital.
ORBH 541	Organizational Systems	1.5 Unit	This course covers the use of general systems theory as a conceptual base for examining organizations from the macro-perspective. The course examines organizational structure and technology, organizations and interorganizational networks in interaction with their societal environments, and large-scale problems of organizational and social power, conflict and change. It is designed to present a large-scale perspective on organization theory and behavior that is complementary to the micro-perspective of organizational behavior.
ORBH 560	Research Methods I	3 Units	This course concerns itself with issues associated with the conduct of social research. The primary focus is on learning the "craft" of research and its associated technologies. Among the topics that are addressed are: scientific method; research terminology and definitions; search design; laboratory experiments; simulations; field experiments; field studies; measurement, reliability and validity; and sampling. This course is intended to help students acquire the skills necessary in undertaking dissertation-related research.
ORBH 565	Research in Gender and Diversity in Organizations	1.5 Unit	This course will provide a full range of feminist research methods exploring relationships between feminism and methodology involving a plurality of perspectives for conducting research and creating knowledge with an emphasis on collecting and interpreting qualitative materials.  Particular attention is paid to understanding gender and diversity related phenomenon that occurs in the workplace.  Classic feminist research from a variety of historical, societal, economic, interpersonal and organizational paradigms are incorporated. Coreq: ORBH doctoral students only.
ORBH 570	Learning and Development	1.5 Unit	This course provides an exploration of the learning and development paradigm underlying the human potential development approach to human resource development.  The origins of this approach in the naturalist epistemologies John Dewey's pragmatism, Kurt Lewin's gestalt psychology, the work of James, Follett, Emerson, Piaget, Maslow, Rogers, and others and current research in adult development, biology and brain/mind research, artificial intelligence, epistemology, moral philosophy and adult learning will be considered.  The course will focus on applications of these ideas to current issues in human resource development such as adult learning in higher education, advanced professional development, and large system learning and development. Coreq: ORBH doctoral students only.
ORBH 601	Special Problems and Topics	1 - 18 Units	This course is offered, with permission, to candidates undertaking reading in a field of special interest.
ORBH 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
DRTH 510	Humans: An Evolutionary Biology	0 - 2 Units	
DRTH 523	Clinical Specialty Seminar	2 Units	This course is a companion to clinical training in orthodontics and involves faculty and student evaluation of past and present literature. Sessions are used to evaluate current timely literature, and lectures and seminars complement the clinical experiences with topics including patient management, treatment of various aged populations and malocclusions, orthopedic appliances, treatment of patients with special needs, and various aspects of fixed and removable mechanotherapy.
PATH 316	Fundamental Immunology	4 Units	Introductory immunology providing an overview of the immune system, including activation, effector mechanisms, and regulation.  Topics include antigen-antibody reactions, immunologically important cell surface receptors, cell-cell interactions, cell-mediated immunity, innate versus adaptive immunity, cytokines, and basic molecular biology and signal transduction in B and T lymphocytes, and immunopathology. Three weekly lectures emphasize experimental findings leading to the concepts of modern immunology. An additional recitation hour is required to integrate the core material with experimental data and known immune mediated diseases. Five mandatory 90 minute group problem sets per semester will be administered outside of lecture and recitation meeting times. Graduate students will be graded separately from undergraduates, and 22 percent of the grade will be based on a critical analysis of a recently published, landmark scientific article.   Offered as BIOL 316, BIOL 416, CLBY 416, PATH 316 and PATH 416. Prereq: BIOL 215 and BIOL 215L.
PATH 390	Undergraduate Research in Cancer Biology, Immunology, or Pathology	1 - 3 Units	Students undertake a research project directly related to ongoing research in the investigator's/instructor's laboratory. Written proposal outlining research topic, a schedule of meetings and format and length of final written report to be prepared prior to registration for credit. Recommended preparation: One year of college chemistry and consent of instructor.
PATH 410	Aging and the Nervous System	1 Unit	Lectures and discussion on aspects of neurobiology of aging in model systems; current research on Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and Huntington's diseases.
PATH 412	Histology and Ultrastructure	4 Units	Comprehensive functional histology course integrating microscopic identification ('structure plus nomenclature') of normal cells, tissues, and organs with aspects of their cell biology, biochemistry, and physiology ('function').  Topical coverage includes complete ('head-to-toe') tissue and organ survey with human emphasis. Offered as ANAT 412 and PATH 412.
PATH 416	Fundamental Immunology	4 Units	Introductory immunology providing an overview of the immune system, including activation, effector mechanisms, and regulation.  Topics include antigen-antibody reactions, immunologically important cell surface receptors, cell-cell interactions, cell-mediated immunity, innate versus adaptive immunity, cytokines, and basic molecular biology and signal transduction in B and T lymphocytes, and immunopathology. Three weekly lectures emphasize experimental findings leading to the concepts of modern immunology. An additional recitation hour is required to integrate the core material with experimental data and known immune mediated diseases. Five mandatory 90 minute group problem sets per semester will be administered outside of lecture and recitation meeting times. Graduate students will be graded separately from undergraduates, and 22 percent of the grade will be based on a critical analysis of a recently published, landmark scientific article.   Offered as BIOL 316, BIOL 416, CLBY 416, PATH 316 and PATH 416. Prereq: Graduate standing and consent of instructor.
PATH 418	Tumor Immunology	3 Units	Interactions between the immune system and tumor cells.  Topics include the historical definition of tumor specific transplantation antigens, immune responses against tumor cells, the effects of tumor cell products on host immune responses, molecular identification of tumor specific transplantation antigens and recent advances in the immunotherapy of human cancers. Prereq: PATH 416.
PATH 420	Topics in Evolution and Medicine	3 Units	The course will be based primarily on the textbook, as well as additional readings to supplement this lucide but relatively brief introduction to the field.  Topics to be covered include the overview of the relevance of evolution to medicine; human demography, history and disease; basic and evolutionary genetics; cystic fibrosis; life history trade-offs and the evolutionary biology of aging; cancer; host-pathogen interactions and co-evolution; somatic cell mutation, selection, and evolution in health and disease (not in textbook); sexually transmitted diseases; malaria; gene culture co-evolution; and man-made diseases. Recommended Preparation: Undergraduate knowledge of genetics, biochemistry, cell biology, microbiology, and immunology is advisable.  Prior consultation and permission from the Course Director is strongly advised.
PATH 422	Current Topics in Cancer	3 Units	The concept of cancer hallmarks has provided a useful guiding principle in our understanding of the complexity of cancer. The hallmarks include sustaining proliferative signaling, evading growth suppressors, enabling replicative immortality, activating invasion and metastasis, inducing angiogenesis, resisting cell death, deregulating cellular energetics, avoiding immune destruction, tumor-promoting inflammation, and genome instability and mutation. The objectives of this course are to (1) examine the principles of some of these hallmarks, and (2) explore potential therapies developed based on these hallmarks of cancer. This is a student-driven and discussion-based graduate course. Students should have had some background on the related subjects and have read scientific papers in their prior coursework. Students will be called on to present and discuss experimental design, data and conclusions from assigned publications. There will be no exams or comprehensive papers but students will submit a one-page critique (strengths and weaknesses) of one of the assigned papers prior to each class meeting. The course will end with a full-day student-run symposium on topics to be decided jointly by students and the course director. Grades will be based on class participation, written critiques, and symposium presentations. Offered as BIOC 420, MBIO 420, PATH 422, and PHRM 420. Prereq: IBMS 453 and IBMS 455.
PATH 430	Oxidative Stress and Disease Pathogenesis	1 Unit	Oxidative stress and free radicals are implicated in a number of disease processes including aging, arthritis, emphysema, Alzheimer's disease and cancer. Lecture course with discussion of recent studies concerning the formation and destructive mechanisms of free radicals in the context of various disease processes. Students read assigned papers and discuss these in class.
PATH 432	Current Topics in Vision Research	3 Units	Vision research is an exciting and multidisciplinary area that draws on the disciplines of biochemistry, genetics, molecular biology, structural biology, neuroscience, and pathology.  This graduate level course will provide the student with broad exposure to the most recent and relevant research currently being conducted in the field.  Topics will cover a variety of diseases and fundamental biological processes occurring in the eye.  Regions of the eye that will be discussed include the cornea, lens, and retina.  Vision disorders discussed include age-related macular degeneration, retinal ciliopathies, and diabetic retinopathy.  Instructors in the course are experts in their field and are members of the multidisciplinary visual sciences research community here at Case Western Reserve University.  Students will be exposed to the experimental approaches and instrumentation currently being used in the laboratory and in clinical settings.  Topics will be covered by traditional lectures, demonstrations in the laboratory and the clinic, and journal club presentations.  Students will be graded on their performance in journal club presentations (40%), research proposal (40%), and class participation (20%).  Offered as NEUR 432, PATH 432, PHRM 432 and BIOC 432.
PATH 444	Neurodegenerative Diseases: Pathological, Cell. & Molecular Perspectives	3 Units	This course, taught by several faculty members, encompasses the full range of factors that contribute to the development of neurodegeneration. Subjects include pathological aspects, neurodegeneration, genetic aspects, protein conformation and cell biology in conditions such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and prion diseases. Students read assigned primary literature and present and discuss these in class.
PATH 465	Advanced Immunobiology	4 Units	This course will cover fundamental (innate and adaptive responses, antigen recognition, cell activation, etc.) and applied (immune evasion, autoimmunity, allergy, transplantation, vaccines, etc.) immunology topics, highlighting the most important and recent advancements found in the primary literature.  Lectures will be derived largely from the primary literature, but will also include modern techniques and fundamental background knowledge to enhance the learning environment for the immunology concepts presented.  Course organization consists of two lectures per week by the immunology faculty, midterm and final examinations, and an oral presentation.  Enrolled students have the option of concurrent enrollment in PATH 466 Writing for Immunologists. Prereq: PATH 416
PATH 466	Proposal Writing for Immunologists	1 Unit	This course is an introduction to research proposal writing and evaluation for immunology graduate students.  One of the most important aspects of being an active investigator in academia, biotechnology, or pharmaceutical industries is being a skilled communicator of one's ideas.  This course is designed to teach these practical writing skills and will include lectures and discussions of key writing strategies.  Throughout the semester, students will write a research proposal on a topic outside of their thesis research focus (but it can be related), present their ideas in front of the class, and take part in an end-of-semester review panel of the proposals of their classmates.  Enrollment requires concurrent enrollment in PATH 465 Advanced Immunobiology and instructor permission. Prereq: PATH 416. Coreq: PATH 465.
PATH 475	Cell and Molecular Biology: Foundations of Disease	3 Units	This course is designed for Master's students in the School of Medicine. The objective is to provide students with a strong foundation in molecular and cellular biology with an emphasis on clinical correlations and critical thinking. The core curriculum is divided into 3 blocks: A) Molecular Biology, B) Cell Structure and Function, and C) Cell Growth and Communities. Lectures are textbook-based and aligned with high-yield MCAT topics. In addition, the class schedule also includes "Clinical Focus" lectures on topics such as COVID-19, neurodegenerative diseases, organelle disorders, cancer, and stem cell therapy. Recommended preparation: undergrad-level cell biology and biochemistry.
PATH 480	Logical Dissection of Biomedical Investigations	3 Units	PATH 480 is an upper level graduate course encompassing discussion and critical appraisal of both published and pre-published research papers, book chapters, commentaries and review articles.  Emphasis will be placed on evaluating the logical relationships connecting hypotheses to experimental design and experimental data to conclusions drawn.  Thus, the course will aim to develop students' capacities for independent thinking and critical analysis.  Half of the course will be devoted to an analysis of fundamental conceptual issues pertaining to immunology, but this material will be applicable to a wide variety of fields.  The other half of the course will be devoted to the analysis of papers that have been submitted for publication ( with the students acting as primary reviewers of these papers).  Our expectation is that this course will have practical relevance for students by providing them with methods to review their own prepublication manuscripts and eliminate common errors.  It should also give students the tools to question widely held beliefs in diverse biomedical fields.  Recommended preparation is completion of the C3MB curriculum and 2nd year or higher graduate school training.  Previous exposure to immunology and molecular biology will be helpful but not required.
PATH 481	Immunology of Infectious Diseases	3 Units	This course centers on mechanisms of immune defense, immune escape and disease pathogenesis caused by important human pathogens.  Some of the infectious diseases covered in this course include AIDS, TB and Malaria.  Most topics focus on immunology of viral, bacterial, protozoan and fungal infections. Topics will also include aspects of epidemiology and global health.  Classes will consist of literature review of current scientific articles, faculty lectures and student presentations.  Grades will be determined by exams, class presentations, participation, and short reports.  Graduate students will also be asked to write a brief research proposal.   PATH 481 involves faculty from:  Division of Infectious Diseases and HIV Medicine, Center for Global Health & Diseases, Department of Pathology. Prereq: PATH 416.
PATH 488	Yeast Genetics and Cell Biology	3 Units	This seminar course provides an introduction to the genetics and molecular biology of the yeasts S. cerevisiae and S. pombe by a discussion of current literature focusing primarily on topics in yeast cell biology. Students are first introduced to the tools of molecular genetics and special features of yeasts that make them important model eukaryotic organisms. Some selected topics include cell polarity, cell cycle, secretory pathways, vesicular and nuclear/cytoplasmic transport, mitochondrial import and biogenesis, chromosome segregation, cytoskeleton, mating response and signal transduction.  Offered as CLBY 488, GENE 488, MBIO 488, and PATH 488.
PATH 510	Basic Pathologic Mechanisms	4 Units	An interdisciplinary introduction to the fundamental principles of molecular and cellular biology as they relate to the pathologic basis of disease. Lectures, laboratories, conferences.
PATH 511	Experimental Pathology Seminar I	1 Unit	Weekly discussions of current topics and research by students, staff and distinguished visitors.
PATH 512	Experimental Pathology Seminar II	1 Unit	Weekly discussions of current topics and research by students, staff and distinguished visitors.
PATH 513	Immunology Journal Club	1 Unit	The Immunology Journal Club is a weekly seminar course in which enrolled students present recently published articles from the primary immunology literature for discussion by the group.  Registered students are required to present one article and participate in discussions.  Articles are selected by the students, must not be directly related to their own research project, and are approved by the course director.  The purpose of the course is to provide the opportunity to practice presentation skills and to foster discussion of recent and high profile advances in immunology. Prereq: Enrolled in M.S. Pathology program.
PATH 520	The Cellular and Molecular Hallmarks of Cancer	3 Units	This course is a comprehensive overview of cancer biology led by faculty content experts. The objective of this course is for students to gain an understanding of the complex properties that define cancer through team-based learning, critical reading of literature, and an introduction to grant writing for future NIH grant submissions. Specific goals include: 	To review current concepts and hallmarks of cancer as defined by Dr. Robert Weinberg's The Biology of Cancer, 2nd edition (suggested reading).  	To learn tools and approaches to critically read and review cancer biology literature. 	To understand the NIH scoring system and use this to develop preliminary grant proposal ideas regarding cancer hallmarks. 	To gain experience in presenting scientific ideas, and leading group discussions on topics related to cancer biology. 	To discuss ethical and societal issues related to emerging technologies in cancer research. Offered as PHRM 520 and PATH 520.
PATH 521	Special Topics in Cancer Biology and Clinical Oncology	1 Unit	This one credit hour course in Cancer Biology is intended to give students an opportunity to do independent literature research while enrolled in PHRM 520/PATH 520.  Students must attend weekly Hematology/Oncology seminar series and write a brief summary of each of the lectures attended. In addition, students must select one of the seminar topics to write a term paper which fully reviews the background related to the topic and scientific and clinical advances in that field. This term paper must also focus of Clinical Oncology, have a translational research component, and integrate with concepts learned in PHRM 520/PATH 520.  Pharmacology students must provide a strong discussion on Therapeutics, while Pathology students must provide a strong component on Pathophysiology of the disease. Recommended preparation: CBIO 453 and CBIO 455, or concurrent enrollment in PHRM 520 or PATH 520. Offered as PATH 521 and PHRM 521.
PATH 522	Therapeutic Targeting of the Hallmarks of Cancer	3 Units	Therapeutic Targeting of the Hallmarks of Cancer is a comprehensive overview of therapeutic strategies to treat and cure cancer. Led by faculty content experts, students will explore the history of cancer therapy development, current therapies, patient experiences, translation of research discovery into new therapeutic strategies, and clinical trials. The goal of this course is for students to conceptualize the translation of research discovery into novel, effective cancer therapeutics. The course will focus on the Hallmarks of Cancer that represent vulnerabilities to be exploited for successful treatment of cancer. In addition to didactic coursework, students will also be exposed to current cancer treatment in a variety of clinical settings observing clinical faculty. Offered as PATH 522 and PHRM 522.
PATH 523	Histopathology of Organ Systems	3 Units	Comprehensive course covering the underlying basic mechanisms of injury and cell death, inflammation, immunity, infection, and neoplasia followed by pathology of specific organ systems.  Material will include histological ('structure') and physiological ('function') aspects related to pathology (human emphasis). Recommended preparation: ANAT 412 or permission of instructor. Offered as ANAT 523 and PATH 523.
PATH 525	Neurodegenerative Diseases of the Brain and the Eye: Molecular Basis of the Brain-Eye Connection	3 Units	This is a graduate-level seminar course that familiarizes students with common neurodegenerative conditions of the brain and the eye. The molecular basis of each disorder and associated ophthalmic pathology will be emphasized. Contribution of heavy metals in brain and ocular pathology will be discussed where appropriate. Specific examples include Alzheimer's Disease, Parkinson's Disease, prion disorders, Huntington's Disease, age-related macular degeneration, glaucoma, and others based on popular demand. The students will be expected to discuss relevant research publications in class in an interactive format. Grading will be based on class participation and completion of an R21 grant proposal. Concurrent enrollment in PATH 526 on grant writing skills is strongly recommended but not required.  Offered as PATH 525 and CLBY 525.
PATH 526	Introduction to Scientific Grant Writing	1 Unit	PATH 526 is a graduate-level course that will familiarize students with grant writing and reviewing skills. The students will be exposed to material pertaining to different grant opportunities, the grant review process, and strategies for maximizing chances of success. Grading will be based on class participation and the preparation and presentation of a R21 grant proposal in class. Coreq: PATH 525.
PATH 601	Special Problems	1 - 18 Units	Research on the nature and causation of disease and on host factors which tend to protect against disease. Special courses and tutorials in subspecialty areas of general and/or systemic anatomic and/or clinical pathology.
PATH 650	Independent Study	1 - 9 Units	Laboratory rotation experience in a selected faculty research laboratory designed to introduce the M.S. student to all aspects of modern laboratory research including the design, execution and analysis of original experimental work.
PATH 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
PATH 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
DPED 533	Pediatric Dentistry Literature Review	0 - 2 Units	Review of the literature in preparation for the specialty board examination in pediatric dentistry. Includes articles on various topics including growth and development, special needs patients, oral pathology and oral medicine, and clinical and hospital practice.
DPED 535	Fundamentals in Pediatric Dentistry	0 - 3 Units	Students present selected chapters from major pediatric dentistry review books for critique and discussion. Major strengths and weaknesses are emphasized. The course director then presents the most current information on the subject.
DPED 537	Advanced Clinical Pediatric Dentistry	0 - 3 Units	Students develop skills in diagnosis, radiographic technique, treatment planning, preventive and restorative dentistry, space management, trauma management, and nonpharmacologic behavior management. There is an opportunity to attend hospital grand rounds and physician conferences.
DPED 639	Advanced Seminar in Pediatric Dentistry	0 - 3 Units	Students present patient cases for in-depth discussion of specific clinical problems.
DPED 690	Pediatric Dental Residency	0 - 10 Units	Allows registration for non-degree-seeking students in graduate level courses at the direction of the department.
DPER 519	Introduction to Advanced Periodontics	0 - 1 Units	Introduction to the Graduate Periodontology Program.  Introduce first year residents to the Graduate Periodontal Clinic and Program.  the course consists of a series of seminars to discuss a variety of topics regarding patient care in the Graduate Periodontics clinic.
DPER 557	Treatment Planning Seminar	0 - 3 Units	Presentation of treated patients with advanced periodontal disease. Discussion of the clinical findings, etiology, diagnosis, and treatment plan. Critical review of the different surgical procedures used in therapy and evaluation of postoperative results. First in a series of four courses.
DPER 577	Clinical Periodontics	0 - 6 Units	Clinical practice of periodontics supplemented by case evaluation and treatment planning. A comprehensive study of normal and diseased periodontal tissues including etiology and diagnosis. Current modes of therapy-rationale technique, and prognosis. First in a series of four courses.
DPER 595	Periodontic and Implant Surgery Seminar	0 - 3 Units	Series of seminars covering clinical, histological, and physiological aspects of the periodontium in health and disease, etiology, diagnosis, prognosis, prevention, and treatment of periodontal disease, as well as the relationship of periodontics to other phases of dentistry.
DPER 665	Current Implant Literature Review	0 - 1 Units	This course will consist of presentation/ discussion of pertinent topics related to the practice of implantology.  Discussion of most relevant articles of each topic.
DPER 666	Implant Literature Review 2	1 Unit	This course will consist of presentation/ discussion of pertinent topics related to practice of implantology and the most relevant articles of each topic.
DPER 667	Current Periodonitc Literature Review	0 - 3 Units	This course will consist of presentation/ discussion of pertinent topics related to practice of implantology and relevant articles on each topic.
DPER 668	Core Classic Literature Review	0 - 3 Units	This course will allow incoming residents to gain knowledge of classic periodontal literature as it relates to etiology, pathogenesis and clinical practice. It will include both clinical and basic sciences topics related to periodontics.
DPER 685	Classic Periodontal Literature Review	0 - 3 Units	Comprehensive discussion of selected articles related to clinical periodontology and basic sciences of significance to periodontal research and therapy.
PHRM 309	Principles of Pharmacology	3 Units	Principles of Pharmacology introduces the basic principles that underlie all of Pharmacology.  The first half of the course introduces, both conceptually and quantitatively, drug absorption, distribution, elimination and metabolism (pharmacokinetics) and general drug receptor theory and mechanism of action (pharmacodynamics).  Genetic variation in response to drugs (pharmacogenetics) is integrated into these basic principles.  The second half of the course covers selected drug classes chosen to illustrate these principles.  Small group/recitation sessions use case histories to reinforce presentation of principles and to discuss public perceptions of therapeutic drug use.  Graduate students will be expected to critically evaluate articles from the literature and participate in a separate weekly discussion session.   Recommended preparation for PHRM 409: Undergraduate degree in science or permission of instructor. Offered as PHRM 309 and PHRM 409. (CHEM 223 and CHEM 224), or (CHEM 323 and CHEM 324), or (EBME 201 and EBME 202), or (BIOL 116 and BIOL 117).
PHRM 340	Science and Society Through Literature	3 Units	This course will examine the interaction of scientific investigation and discovery with the society it occurred in. What is the effect of science on society and, as importantly, what is the effect of society on science? An introduction will consider the heliocentric controversy with focus on Galileo. Two broad areas, tuberculosis and the Frankenstein myth, will then be discussed covering the period 1800-present. With tuberculosis, fiction, art and music will be examined to understand the changing views of society towards the disease, how society's perception of tuberculosis victims changed, and how this influenced their treatments and research. With Frankenstein, the original novel in its historical context will be examined. Using fiction and film, the transformation of the original story into myth with different connotations and implications will be discussed. Most classes will be extensive discussions coupled with student presentations of assigned materials. Offered as PHRM 340, BETH 440, PHRM 440, and HSTY 440.
PHRM 400	Research Experience in Pharmacology	0 - 1 Units	Research rotation in pharmacology.
PHRM 401	Principles of Pharmacology I: The Molecular Basis of Therapeutics	3 Units	This core course focuses on the chemical and biochemical properties of therapeutic agents and molecular mechanisms of therapeutic action, including kinetic and thermodynamic principles of enzyme catalysis and drug-receptor interactions. Moreover, emphasis is placed on fundamental principles of pharmacokinetics, including the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion of drugs. Mathematical concepts needed to understand appropriate administration of drugs and maintaining therapeutic concentrations of drugs in the body are discussed. A second broad area of emphasis is on fundamental principles of pharmacodynamics, including drug-receptor theory, log dose-response relationships, therapeutic index, receptor turnover, and signal transduction mechanisms.  The primary learning objective is to develop a self-directed, critical approach to the evaluation and design of experimental research in the broad context of receptor interactions with endogenous ligands and therapeutic agents in the context of disease models.  This is a team-coordinated course involving session organized by faculty to facilitate student-directed learning experiences including discussion of study questions, problem solving applications, and primary literature presentations. A two-part laboratory exercise introduces experimental methodologies widely applied during the study of molecular interactions between therapeutic agents and receptor targets to reinforce fundamental principles of drug action.  This 3-credit hour course meets 3 hr per week during the spring semester of year 1.
PHRM 402	Principles of Pharmacology II: The Physiological Basis of Therapeutics	3 Units	This course focuses on human physiology of organ systems including the central nervous system, cardiovascular system, and those systems (gastrointestinal, hepatic, and renal) that are involved in determining the pharmacokinetics or time course of drug action in vivo.  A second major emphasis is placed on disease-based sessions where normal physiology, pathophysiology, and key drug classes to treat pathophysiologies are discussed. The students learn key concepts in endocrine pathologies, inflammatory disorders, pulmonary diseases, infectious diseases, and cancer.  The main learning objectives are for the student to gain an understanding of basic principles of modern pharmacology and physiology and to build self-directed learning skills.  This is a highly interactive course in which faculty lectures are minimized.  A heavy emphasis is placed on student-directed learning experiences including presentation and discussion of primary literature, problem solving applications, small group discussion and team-based learning.  This 3-credit hour course meets 3 hr per week during the fall semester of year 2.
PHRM 409	Principles of Pharmacology	3 Units	Principles of Pharmacology introduces the basic principles that underlie all of Pharmacology.  The first half of the course introduces, both conceptually and quantitatively, drug absorption, distribution, elimination and metabolism (pharmacokinetics) and general drug receptor theory and mechanism of action (pharmacodynamics).  Genetic variation in response to drugs (pharmacogenetics) is integrated into these basic principles.  The second half of the course covers selected drug classes chosen to illustrate these principles.  Small group/recitation sessions use case histories to reinforce presentation of principles and to discuss public perceptions of therapeutic drug use.  Graduate students will be expected to critically evaluate articles from the literature and participate in a separate weekly discussion session.   Recommended preparation for PHRM 409: Undergraduate degree in science or permission of instructor. Offered as PHRM 309 and PHRM 409.
PHRM 420	Current Topics in Cancer	3 Units	The concept of cancer hallmarks has provided a useful guiding principle in our understanding of the complexity of cancer. The hallmarks include sustaining proliferative signaling, evading growth suppressors, enabling replicative immortality, activating invasion and metastasis, inducing angiogenesis, resisting cell death, deregulating cellular energetics, avoiding immune destruction, tumor-promoting inflammation, and genome instability and mutation. The objectives of this course are to (1) examine the principles of some of these hallmarks, and (2) explore potential therapies developed based on these hallmarks of cancer. This is a student-driven and discussion-based graduate course. Students should have had some background on the related subjects and have read scientific papers in their prior coursework. Students will be called on to present and discuss experimental design, data and conclusions from assigned publications. There will be no exams or comprehensive papers but students will submit a one-page critique (strengths and weaknesses) of one of the assigned papers prior to each class meeting. The course will end with a full-day student-run symposium on topics to be decided jointly by students and the course director. Grades will be based on class participation, written critiques, and symposium presentations. Offered as BIOC 420, MBIO 420, PATH 422, and PHRM 420. Prereq: IBMS 453 and IBMS 455.
PHRM 432	Current Topics in Vision Research	3 Units	Vision research is an exciting and multidisciplinary area that draws on the disciplines of biochemistry, genetics, molecular biology, structural biology, neuroscience, and pathology.  This graduate level course will provide the student with broad exposure to the most recent and relevant research currently being conducted in the field.  Topics will cover a variety of diseases and fundamental biological processes occurring in the eye.  Regions of the eye that will be discussed include the cornea, lens, and retina.  Vision disorders discussed include age-related macular degeneration, retinal ciliopathies, and diabetic retinopathy.  Instructors in the course are experts in their field and are members of the multidisciplinary visual sciences research community here at Case Western Reserve University.  Students will be exposed to the experimental approaches and instrumentation currently being used in the laboratory and in clinical settings.  Topics will be covered by traditional lectures, demonstrations in the laboratory and the clinic, and journal club presentations.  Students will be graded on their performance in journal club presentations (40%), research proposal (40%), and class participation (20%).  Offered as NEUR 432, PATH 432, PHRM 432 and BIOC 432.
PHRM 440	Science and Society Through Literature	3 Units	This course will examine the interaction of scientific investigation and discovery with the society it occurred in. What is the effect of science on society and, as importantly, what is the effect of society on science? An introduction will consider the heliocentric controversy with focus on Galileo. Two broad areas, tuberculosis and the Frankenstein myth, will then be discussed covering the period 1800-present. With tuberculosis, fiction, art and music will be examined to understand the changing views of society towards the disease, how society's perception of tuberculosis victims changed, and how this influenced their treatments and research. With Frankenstein, the original novel in its historical context will be examined. Using fiction and film, the transformation of the original story into myth with different connotations and implications will be discussed. Most classes will be extensive discussions coupled with student presentations of assigned materials. Offered as PHRM 340, BETH 440, PHRM 440, and HSTY 440.
PHRM 466	Cell Signaling	3 Units	This is an advanced problem set and research paper-based discussion format course that covers cell signaling mechanisms; there are no lectures.  Included are discussions of neurotransmitter-gated ion channels, growth factor receptor kinases, cytokine receptors, G protein-coupled receptors, steroid receptors, heterotrimeric G proteins, ras family GTPases, second messenger cascades, protein kinase cascades, second messenger regulation of transcription factors, signals for regulation of cell growth, division, tissue development and cell death. Offered as CLBY 466, NEUR 466, PHOL 466 and PHRM 466.
PHRM 475	Protein Biophysics	3 Units	This course focuses on in-depth understanding of the molecular biophysics of proteins. Structural, thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of protein function and structure-function relationships will be considered at the advanced conceptual level. The application of these theoretical frameworks will be illustrated with examples from the literature and integration of biophysical knowledge with description at the cellular and systems level. The format consists of lectures, problem sets, and student presentations. A special emphasis will be placed on discussion of original publications.  Offered as BIOC 475, CHEM 475, PHOL 475, PHRM 475, and NEUR 475.
PHRM 511	Pharmacology Seminar Series	0 - 1 Units	Current topics of interest in the pharmacologist sciences.
PHRM 520	The Cellular and Molecular Hallmarks of Cancer	3 Units	This course is a comprehensive overview of cancer biology led by faculty content experts. The objective of this course is for students to gain an understanding of the complex properties that define cancer through team-based learning, critical reading of literature, and an introduction to grant writing for future NIH grant submissions. Specific goals include: 	To review current concepts and hallmarks of cancer as defined by Dr. Robert Weinberg's The Biology of Cancer, 2nd edition (suggested reading).  	To learn tools and approaches to critically read and review cancer biology literature. 	To understand the NIH scoring system and use this to develop preliminary grant proposal ideas regarding cancer hallmarks. 	To gain experience in presenting scientific ideas, and leading group discussions on topics related to cancer biology. 	To discuss ethical and societal issues related to emerging technologies in cancer research. Offered as PHRM 520 and PATH 520.
PHRM 521	Special Topics in Cancer Biology and Clinical Oncology	1 Unit	This one credit hour course in Cancer Biology is intended to give students an opportunity to do independent literature research while enrolled in PHRM 520/PATH 520.  Students must attend weekly Hematology/Oncology seminar series and write a brief summary of each of the lectures attended. In addition, students must select one of the seminar topics to write a term paper which fully reviews the background related to the topic and scientific and clinical advances in that field. This term paper must also focus of Clinical Oncology, have a translational research component, and integrate with concepts learned in PHRM 520/PATH 520.  Pharmacology students must provide a strong discussion on Therapeutics, while Pathology students must provide a strong component on Pathophysiology of the disease. Recommended preparation: CBIO 453 and CBIO 455, or concurrent enrollment in PHRM 520 or PATH 520. Offered as PATH 521 and PHRM 521.
PHRM 522	Therapeutic Targeting of the Hallmarks of Cancer	3 Units	Therapeutic Targeting of the Hallmarks of Cancer is a comprehensive overview of therapeutic strategies to treat and cure cancer. Led by faculty content experts, students will explore the history of cancer therapy development, current therapies, patient experiences, translation of research discovery into new therapeutic strategies, and clinical trials. The goal of this course is for students to conceptualize the translation of research discovery into novel, effective cancer therapeutics. The course will focus on the Hallmarks of Cancer that represent vulnerabilities to be exploited for successful treatment of cancer. In addition to didactic coursework, students will also be exposed to current cancer treatment in a variety of clinical settings observing clinical faculty. Offered as PATH 522 and PHRM 522.
PHRM 525	Topics in Cell and Molecular Pharmacology	0 - 18 Units	Individual library research project under the guidance of a pharmacology sponsor. Projects will reflect the research interest of the faculty sponsor, including molecular endocrinology, neuropharmacology, receptor activation and signal transduction, molecular mechanisms of enzyme action and metabolic regulation.
PHRM 526	Grant Writing Tutorial	1 - 3 Units	Students will be expected to provide critiques of a grant proposal to bring to a workshop. At the workshop, a faculty review panel will discuss the grant proposal and provide critiques to illustrate the key components that are necessary for any grant proposal, and the specific items that enhance the quality of the proposal or detract from it.  The students will be able to compare what they emphasized in their critiques to what the expert panel focused on. After completing the workshop, each student will prepare a proposal based on their thesis topic; this document will be scored, and the student will also be evaluated for an oral defense of the proposal.
PHRM 527	Pathways to Personalized Medicine	3 Units	This is a course of independent study designed to take the student from the bedside to the bench and back again.  Students will select a problem from a list of important therapeutic issues related to variability in drug responsiveness and design a research program to elucidate its molecular, biochemical, genetic and pathophysiological basis.  The resulting research proposal is expected to be multidimensional and include molecular, cellular, whole animal and clinical investigations.  To guide the process students will assemble a mentoring group including at least one member of the Translational Therapeutics Track Faculty, a clinician working in the clinical realm in which the problem originates and a basic scientist with relevant experience.  The written proposal will be defended orally. Recommended preparation: 1st year Pharm Graduate required courses.
PHRM 528	Contemporary Approaches to Drug Discovery	3 Units	This course is designed to teach the students how lead compounds are discovered, optimized, and processed through clinical trials for FDA approval.  Topics will include: medicinal chemistry, parallel synthesis, drug delivery and devices, drug administration and pharmacokinetics, and clinical trials.  A special emphasis will be placed on describing how structural biology is used for in silico screening and lead optimization.  This component will include hands-on experience in using sophisticated drug discovery software to conduct in silico screening and the development of drug libraries.  Each student will conduct a course project involving in silico screening and lead optimization against known drug targets, followed by the drafting of an inventory disclosure.  Another important aspect of this course will be inclusion of guest lectures by industrial leaders who describe examples of success stories of drug development. Offered as BIOC 528, PHOL 528, PHRM 528, and SYBB 528.
PHRM 529	FDA Regulation in Entrepreneurship and Clinical Research	0 - 3 Units	The FDA Regulation in Entrepreneurship and Clinical Research course is designed to provide foundational knowledge in the FDA approval and regulatory process while highlighting scientific, clinical, ethical, and other related emergent factors for consideration. The course includes a series of lecture-based classes delivered by content experts and interdisciplinary team-based learning discussions of case studies designed for the application of lecture content. Students who elect to take the course for three credits as opposed to one credit will go through the process of reviewing an example Investigational New Drug (IND) or Investigational Drug Exemption (IDE) Application (midterm project) and preparing an IND or IDE for submission (final project) with the guidance of nationally renowned experts in FDA regulation and law. The primary goal of this course is that upon completion, students will be able to take the knowledge gained from content experts and apply it to facilitate the movement of their current or future technologies through the FDA approval process.  Offered as CRSP 529, PHRM 529 and RGME 529.
PHRM 555	Current Proteomics and Bioinformatics	3 Units	This course is designed for graduate students across the university who wish to acquire a better understanding of fundamental concepts of proteomics and related bioinformatics as well as hands-on experience with techniques used in current proteomics.  Lectures will cover protein/peptide separation techniques, protein mass spectrometry, and biological applications which include quantitative proteomics, protein modification proteomics, interaction proteomics, structural genomics and structural proteomics. Also, it will cover experimental design, basic statistical concept and issues related to high-dimensional data from high-throughput technologies.  Laboratory portion will involve practice on the separation of proteins by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, molecular weight measurement of proteins by mass spectrometry, peptide structural characterization by tandem mass spectrometry. It will also include bioinformatics tools for protein identification and protein-protein interaction networks.  The instructors' research topics will also be discussed. Recommended preparation: CBIO 453, CBIO 455, and PQHS 431. Offered as PHRM 555 and SYBB 555.
PHRM 600	Preparation for Qualifying Exam	1 Unit	Students pursuing the M.S. or Ph.D. degrees in Pharmacology are required to prepare systematically for the comprehensive qualifying exam by reviewing the concepts of cellular and molecular biology and pharmacology.  The qualifier is comprised of a two-part written exam administered simultaneously to all eligible students.  It is designed to evaluate their understanding of concepts presented in the various core courses.  It also assesses their skills in critical reading of research articles and design of experiments.  The division into two parts allows each student to receive feedback on deficient areas and work toward improvement on the second segment.  Eligibility:  Students may register for the exam when they have fulfilled two criteria: (a) Successful completion (grade B or better) in all of the Core Courses, and an overall GPA of 3.0 or better. (b) Satisfactory performance in all research rotations and consistent research effort in the thesis laboratory as documented formally by the Ph.D. mentor.  No student on probation may sit for the Qualifying Exam (Prelim I). Prereq: CBIO 453, CBIO 455, PHRM 401 and PHRM 402.
PHRM 601	Independent Study and Research	1 - 18 Units	
PHRM 602	Translational Pharmaceutical Science: Culminating Research Experience	3 - 6 Units	This courseis a research experience that may serve as the culminating experience for master's students in the Department of Pharmacology.
PHRM 603	Translational Pharmaceutical Science: Culminating Internship Experience	3 - 6 Units	This course is an internship experience that may serve as the culminating experience for master's students in the Department of Pharmacology.
PHRM 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
PHRM 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
PHIL 101	Introduction to Philosophy	3 Units	Basic problems of philosophy and methods of philosophical thinking. Problems raised by science, morality, religion, politics, and art. Readings from classical and contemporary philosophers. Normally given in multiple sections with different instructors and possibly with different texts. All sections share core materials in theory of knowledge, metaphysics, and ethics despite differences that may exist in emphasis.
PHIL 111	What is Science? Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science	3 Units	We look at historical and philosophical aspects of modern science. The objective of the course is to develop a sense of (1) what forms scientific research has taken historically, and (2) what it is about scientific research that makes it distinctive as a form of human knowledge. Offered as HPSC 111, PHIL 111 and HSTY 111.
PHIL 201	Introduction to Logic	3 Units	Presentation, application, and evaluation of formal methods for determining the validity of arguments. Discussion of the relationship between logic and other disciplines. Counts for CAS Quantitative Reasoning Requirement.
PHIL 203	Revolutions in Science	3 Units	Historical and philosophical interpretation of some epochal events in development of science. Copernican revolution, Newtonian mechanics, Einstein's relativity physics, quantum mechanics, and evolutionary theory; patterns of scientific growth; structure of scientific "revolutions;" science and "pseudo-science." First half of a year-long sequence. Offered as HSTY 203 and PHIL 203.
PHIL 204	Philosophy of Science	3 Units	Conceptual, methodological, and epistemological issues about science: concept formation, explanation, prediction, confirmation, theory construction and status of unobservables; metaphysical presuppositions and implications of science; semantics of scientific language; illustrations from special sciences. Second half of a year-long sequence. Offered as HSTY 207 and PHIL 204.
PHIL 207	Good Relationships	3 Units	What is a good relationship?  What is the difference between everyday work relationships, friendships, and romance?  What is love?  What is the role of desire in relationships?  What is the role of respect and of moral judgment?  What can a bad relationship teach us?  In this class, we explore the logic of personal relationships by focusing on the central experience of being in love.  However, our approach is indirect.  We begin with what we can learn from a bad relationship.  In addition to philosophical and psychological reading, students design exercises that might improve a personal relationship as found in fiction or history.  By thus imaginatively studying relationships in narration, they are asked to develop their own concept of a good relationship.
PHIL 221	Indian Philosophy	3 Units	We will survey the origins of Indian philosophical thought, with an emphasis on early Buddhist, Hindu and Jain literature. Our concern will be the methods, presuppositions, arguments, and goals of these schools and trajectories of thought. What were their theories on the nature of the person, the nature of reality, and the nature and process of knowing? What were the debates between the schools and the major points of controversy? And, most importantly, are the positions/arguments internally incoherent? Offered as PHIL 221 and RLGN 221. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
PHIL 222	The Science of Happiness	3 Units	What actually makes us happy? Scientific research shows most of us get this badly wrong. For instance, money is far less important, and embracing negative emotions far more important, than most people realize. When philosophy first got started, it focused on the single most practically important question anyone can ask: How can I live a good life? A recent boom in scientific research is now validating insights from traditions that take this approach of philosophy as a way of life, including ancient greek, eastern & continental schools of philosophy. Open to all students (no pre-requisites), this course combines intellectual inquiry with experiential approaches, blending philosophical insight, evidence-based interventions and cutting-edge science. For instance, students will learn about approaches to emotion regulation and stress resilience all the way from the ancient Stoics to recently published work in psychological science. This course won't make you happy. It will sometimes make you sad. It will expose you to tools that you can use to improve your physical and psychological well-being, and - most important of all - your sense of purpose in life.
PHIL 225	Evolution	3 Units	Multidisciplinary study of the course and processes of organic evolution provides a broad understanding of the evolution of structural and functional diversity, the relationships among organisms and their environments, and the phylogenetic relationships among major groups of organisms.  Topics include the genetic basis of micro- and macro-evolutionary change, the concept of adaptation, natural selection, population dynamics, theories of species formation, principles of phylogenetic inference, biogeography, evolutionary rates, evolutionary convergence, homology, Darwinian medicine, and conceptual and philosophic issues in evolutionary theory. Offered as ANTH 225, BIOL 225, EEPS 225, HSTY 225, and PHIL 225.
PHIL 253	Religion and Philosophy in China	3 Units	This course critically examines the three principal religious and philosophical traditions of China: the Confucian, Daoist, and Chinese Buddhist traditions. Through a combination of assigned print and online readings, video clips and documentaries, class discussions, and written assignments, students explore the origins and historical developments, principal thinkers, central religious and doctrinal themes, ethics, spirituality, popular devotions, social movements, and contemporary developments of these three major religious and philosophical traditions of China. Students will consider the wider social, cultural, ethical, economic, and political dimensions of Chinese religions and philosophies generally, and themes of community and society, identity constructions, personal experiences, movements, as well as their socio-cultural reproductions in contemporary China, and where appropriate, the Chinese Diaspora in North America. Offered as CHIN 253C, ETHS 253C, PHIL 253 and RLGN 253. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
PHIL 261	Our Knowledge of Climate Change: What do we know and how do we know it?	3 Units	Traditional theories of knowledge have concentrated on the actions and beliefs of individuals, and how they marshal evidence from the world to support or refute their scientific hypotheses. This traditional epistemological framework has been challenged by the developments of the modern era of Big Science, resulting in the development of new approaches to a social epistemology of science.  Reflective of how science is done, this epistemological framework in turn can provide guidance for the robust prosecution of the scientific enterprise.  Perhaps nowhere is this more important than in climate science, where on the one hand the underlying dynamics of climate change pose an existential threat to our civilization, and on the other, there are active and well organized efforts to derail the scientific process and to denigrate the scientists. This course will first develop classical notions of the epistemology of science, including the role of models and issues of uncertainty (statistical, systematic, and gross) as well as the challenges of developing a robust scientific process resistant to fraud. These issues will be illustrated by consideration of various classical experiments.  The course will then expand the epistemological framework to the collaborative context of modern big science, illustrating the issues by examples from the field of high energy physics (which saw the development of the World Wide Web by CERN, the European Organization for Nuclear Research, to allow physicists from around the world to share and collectively analyze data).  With this in hand the course will explore the history and current state of climate science in the framework of a social epistemology of big science. Students will develop a good understanding of the role of hierarchical models of climate science, the empirical basis for our current understanding of anthropogenic climate change, the role and development of international coordination of climate science and its implications for policy, and the challenges posed by hostile, well-organized efforts to disrupt the scientific process, the public understanding of the science, and ultimately the processes necessary for addressing the challenges of climate change. Offered as PHIL 261 and PHYS 261.
PHIL 270	Introduction to Gender Studies	3 Units	This course introduces women and men students to the methods and concepts of gender studies, women's studies, and feminist theory.  An interdisciplinary course, it covers approaches used in literary criticism, history, philosophy, political science, sociology, anthropology, psychology, film studies, cultural studies, art history, and religion.  It is the required introductory course for students taking the women's and gender studies major. Offered as ENGL 270, HSTY 270, PHIL 270, RLGN 270, SOCI 201, and WGST 201. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
PHIL 271	Bioethics: Dilemmas	3 Units	We have the genetic technology to change nature and human nature, but should we?  We have the medical technology to extend almost any human life, but is this always good?  Should we clone humans?  Should we allow doctor-assisted suicide for the terminally ill?  This course invites students from all academic disciplines and fields to examine current and future issues in bioethics--e.g., theory and methods in bioethics; death and dying; organ transplantation; genetics; aging and dementia; fertility and reproduction; distributive justice in health care access. The course will include guest lecturers from nationally-known Bioethics faculty. Offered as BETH 271 and PHIL 271.
PHIL 301	Ancient Philosophy	3 Units	Western philosophy from the early Greeks to the Skeptics. Emphasis on the pre-Socratics, Plato and Aristotle. Recommended preparation: PHIL 101 and consent of department. Offered as CLSC 301 and PHIL 301.
PHIL 302	Modern Philosophy	3 Units	British empiricism: Bacon, Hobbes, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume. Continental rationalism: Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz. The critical philosophy of Kant. Recommended preparation: PHIL 101 or consent of instructor.
PHIL 305	Ethics	3 Units	Analysis of ethical theories and concepts of goodness, right, and obligation. Discussion of nature of justice, problem of justification of moral principles, and relation between facts and values. Offered as PHIL 305 and PHIL 405. Prereq: PHIL 101 or PHIL 205.
PHIL 306	Mathematical Logic and Model Theory	3 Units	Propositional calculus and quantification theory; consistency and completeness theorems; Gödel incompleteness results and their philosophical significance; introduction to basic concepts of model theory; problems of formulation of arguments in philosophy and the sciences. Offered as PHIL 306, MATH 406 and PHIL 406.
PHIL 311	Science of Ethics: The Neuroscience, Psychology, and Behavioral Economics of Morality	3 Units	Ethics is traditionally a branch of Philosophy. However, research in neuroscience, psychology and behavioral economics is shedding new light on the underlying bases of ethical behavior and ethical thinking. The class will examine how this work informs and enriches traditional philosophical ethics. Topical focus of the class will depend on student interest, but potentially include: What determines how ethically we behave: our character or our situation? What role do and should emotions play in ethical thinking? Can science tell us whether utilitarian or deontological ethics is better? The dark tetrad: narcissism, Machiavellianism, psychopathy and; sadism. What is empathy and what roles does it play in generating both ethical and unethical behavior. Varieties of moral disengagement, including dehumanizing. Cognitive dissonance and the slide into unethical behavior. Radicalization into violent extremism. Promoting ethical behavior. Offered as PHIL 311 and PHIL 411.
PHIL 313	Philosophy of Mathematics	3 Units	Logical paradoxes and their effects on foundations of mathematics. Status of mathematical entities and nature of mathematical truths. Formalist, logicist, and intuitionist positions. Recommended preparation: PHIL 101 or PHIL 201. Offered as PHIL 313 and PHIL 413.
PHIL 315	Selected Topics in Philosophy	3 Units	Examination of views of a major philosopher or philosophical school, a significant philosophical topic, or a topic that relates to philosophy and other discipline. Recommended preparation: PHIL 101. Offered as PHIL 315 and PHIL 415. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
PHIL 317	War and Morality	3 Units	The aim of this course is to explore a wide range of ethical issues relating to the decision to take a nation to war, how wars are conducted, and efforts to establish order in the wake of a conflict.  Topics include the Just War tradition, pacifism, humanitarian intervention, moral repair and the establishment of a just peace, conduct of war, warrior codes, warrior transitions, and civil-military relations.  We will be examining the ethics of war from the perspectives of both states and individuals.  War is a crucible that strips those caught up in its horrors down to their fundamental selves inspiring acts of both inhuman depravity and seemingly superhuman nobility.  This course is presented in a seminar format with lively discussions centering on contemporary readings in military ethics from texts and journals.   Offered as PHIL 317, PHIL 417, and LAWS 5135.
PHIL 318	People and Planet	3 Units	In this course, we study the way in which the environment is a matter of politics.  Our approach is philosophical, examining the concept of politics in light of how societies shape their environment on Earth.  This elucidation's aim is practical.  We want to know not only what environmental politics is, but what we should do about it.  Students from any major are welcome, without prerequisite. Offered as PHIL 318, POSC 318 and ESTD 318.
PHIL 323	Empathy in Theory and Practice	3 Units	This course understands 'empathy' broadly, to include not only the sharing of emotion with others but also our capacities for perspective taking, intersubjectivity, narrative comprehension, aesthetic appreciation, and ethical reasoning. These forms of empathic reasoning are both neurologically and psychologically distinct from the more paradigmatic forms reasoning e.g. science, logic & mathematics - they work with emotions and are essentially perspectival in nature. This class explores two complementary sides of empathy: (i) What is the theory and science behind empathy? (ii) How can we use empathy more effectively? There are no prereqs and students are not expected to have taken prior classes on empathy. Nonetheless, this is an advanced, rather than introductory or remedial, class. Students are expected to bring prior learning and/or practical expertise to contribute to a deep dive into the subject. If in any doubt, you are welcome to ask the professor. Offered as PHIL 323 and PHIL 423.
PHIL 325	Philosophy of Feminism	3 Units	Dimensions of gender difference. Definition of feminism. Critical examination of feminist critiques of culture, including especially politics, ideology, epistemology, ethics, and psychology. Readings from traditional and contemporary sources.  Offered as PHIL 325, PHIL 425 and WGST 325. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: PHIL 101.
PHIL 326	Religion, Global Health, and Human Rights	3 Units	Global Health is an interdisciplinary field concerned with improving health and achieving equity in health for all people, worldwide, focusing on transnational health issues, identifying determinants, and proposing solutions. This course examines issues in global health and human rights and considers the contributions religious ethics may make in analyzing and evaluating such issues. In the first half of the course, we will familiarize ourselves with theoretical issues including what a human right is, whether there's a human right to health, what socially determines health, and how religion relates to global health. In the second half the course, we will turn to practical issues in global health: women, maternal, and reproductive health; neonatal and pediatric health; access to medication and the right to health; emergency relief and humanitarian aid; and access to freshwater. We will conclude by considering the future of global health. Over the course of the semester, we will also become familiar with religious ethics and the relationship among religious ethics, global health, and human rights. In doing so, students will learn about the foundations for religion, global health, and human rights as they intersect with care for individuals and communities in our interconnected and globalized world. Offered as RLGN 326, RLGN 426, PHIL 326 and PHIL 426. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
PHIL 330	Topics in Ethics	3 Units	Examination of views in ethics of a major philosopher or philosophical school, a significant philosophical topic in ethics, or a topic that relates ethics to philosophy and another discipline. Recommended preparation: PHIL 101 or PHIL 205. Offered as PHIL 330 and PHIL 430.
PHIL 333	Philosophy of Religion	3 Units	Topics include: classical and contemporary arguments for God's existence; divine foreknowledge and human freedom; the problem of evil and theodicy; nature and significance of religious experience; mysticism; varieties of religious metaphysics; knowledge, belief and faith; nature of religious discourse. Readings from traditional and contemporary sources. Recommended preparation for PHIL 433 and RLGN 433: PHIL 101 or RLGN 102. Offered as PHIL 333, RLGN 333, PHIL 433, and RLGN 433. Prereq: PHIL 101
PHIL 334	Political and Social Philosophy	3 Units	Justification of social institutions, primarily political ones. Such distinctions as that between de facto and legitimate authority; analysis of criteria for evaluation, such as social justice and equality; inquiry into theories of justification of the state; theory of democratic government and its alternatives. Readings from classical and contemporary sources. Recommended preparation: PHIL 101. Offered as PHIL 334, POSC 354, PHIL 434, and POSC 454.
PHIL 335	Philosophy of Law	3 Units	This is an examination of the general nature of law, the broad concerns of jurisprudence, the study of comparative law, and many of the issues raised in the literature of legal philosophy. Students will examine the principles of legal positivism, mitigated natural law, and rights theory. Selected readings and cases will illustrate these theories, which will also be examined in the context of rule selection by new governments in developing or revolutionary societies. The course also looks at the general nature of legal systems: how politics, morality, and individual views of justice and rights affect particular court cases and the course and development of law generally. Topics will include abortion, obscenity and sin, civil disobedience, affirmative action, surrogatehood, and the death penalty. This is unlike any other of the legal theory or jurisprudence courses, and those who have sampled legal theory elsewhere in a different form are welcome and encouraged to enroll. Recommended preparation: PHIL 101. Offered as LAWS 5747, PHIL 335, and PHIL 435.
PHIL 336	Military Ethics, the Military Profession, and International Law	3 Units	The aim of this course is to provide a foundational understanding of international law as it relates to war and to explore the relationship between international law, military ethics, and the military profession.  In addition to traditional lectures and seminar-style discussions, this hybrid course will feature video lectures by international experts in the field of military ethics and online assignments, discussion sections led by the Visiting Distinguished Inamori Scholar in Military Ethics.  Topics covered will concern the international legal framework pertaining to the use of force, viewed through the prism of a professional code of conduct that has been forged over centuries, across different warrior cultures. Offered as PHIL 336 and PHIL 436. Prereq: PHIL 317 or PHIL 417.
PHIL 345	Epistemology and Metaphysics	3 Units	Traditional problems of epistemology, such as definition of knowledge, justification of belief, nature of evidence and foundationalism, skepticism, the a priori, and the role of sense perception in knowledge. Metaphysical presuppositions and implications of epistemological views. Forms of realism and anti-realism. Recommended preparation: PHIL 101. Offered as PHIL 345 and PHIL 445.
PHIL 356	Comparative Philosophy	3 Units	Philosophy in the etymological sense of the term, love of wisdom, subsumes ontological, ethical and epistemological inquires addressing fundamental questions about reality, the place of humans in that reality, the values of things and human obligations, and the sources of knowledge.  The major purpose of this course is to discover, understand, explicate and articulate the affinities and differences in the way the fundamental questions are addressed in different cultural contexts, thereby to appreciate the cross-cultural kinship among human minds as well as to be challenged by the differences that may engender conflicts.  We will explore the possibility of building a trans-cultural meta-cultural meta-discourse in which thinkers from many traditions can participate on equal footing.  We will come to face up to the question whether truly universal philosophy is possible, upon what conditions.  Representative texts from the Western, Chinese and Buddhist traditions including selected works of Plato, Aristotle, Augustine, Descartes, Kant, Nietzsche, Heidegger, Lao Tzu, Confucius, Chuang Tzu, Dhammapada of the Buddha and D. Suzuki's Zen Buddhism will be read. Offered as PHIL 356 and PHIL 456. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: PHIL 101 or requisites not met permission.
PHIL 357	Christian Bioethics	3 Units	Bioethics is concerned with both clinical and population level healthcare issues. Christian Bioethics aims to integrate the discipline of theology with the field of bioethics to critically evaluate the goals of healthcare and the practices associated with these goals. This course examines the theological sources used to evaluate contemporary clinical and population level healthcare issues. We will examine issues including abortion, end-of-life care, genetic enhancement, the concept of disability, health inequalities and justice, and personal and social responsibility for health, especially as these relate to political and social justice. We will also become familiar with religious moral reasoning and the relationship between religious ethics and nonreligious moral and political philosophy. In doing so, students will learn about the foundations for religion, medicine, and ethics as they intersect with care for individuals and communities. Offered as BETH 357, BETH 457, PHIL 357, PHIL 457, RLGN 357 and RLGN 457.
PHIL 360	Science and Society	3 Units	This course examines the complex ethical and other value relationships that exist between science and society.  Students will be encouraged to question the simplistic view that science proceeds independently of societal values and contentious ethical commitments.  A range of other social factors, such as ethical belief systems, political forces, and large-scale financial interests all influence new scientific and technological developments.  In order to illuminate each of these larger themes, this course focuses on three exciting areas of scientific inquiry: stem cell research; synthetic biology; and nanotechnology.  Each of these contentious scientific fields provides an excellent view into the challenging ethical, cultural, social, political, and economic issues that will face students, both as scholars and as citizens.  No prior technical knowledge is necessary for any of these scientific areas.  All relevant scientific information will be provided during the course by the professor. Offered as BETH 360, BETH 460 and PHIL 360.
PHIL 366	Brain, Mind and Consciousness: The Science and Philosophy of Mind	3 Units	The course introduces students to key topics in philosophy of mind from the perspective of our increasingly advanced scientific understanding of mind and brain (e.g. derived from neuroscience, psychology and cognitive science). Key philosophical topics covered include dualism, physicalism, idealism, consciousness and free will. Key scientific issues covered include methods and assumptions underlying research in psychology and neuroscience, introspection, essentialism, dehumanizing, and work on free will and consciousness. No pre-requisites other than curiosity are required, however students will benefit from having previously taken courses in philosophy, neuroscience, psychology and/or computer science. Students are expected to complete the assigned readings with care and attention, and to participate in discussion. The goal is for students to leave with an understanding of the rich ways in which different approaches can shed light on the human mind, including an appreciation of the limits of scientific inquiry into the mind. Offered as PHIL 366 and PHIL 466.
PHIL 367	Topics in Evolutionary Biology	3 Units	The focus for this course on a special topic of interest in evolutionary biology will vary from one offering to the next. Examples of possible topics include theories of speciation, the evolution of language, the evolution of sex, evolution and biodiversity, molecular evolution. ANAT/ANTH/EEPS/PHIL/PHOL 467/BIOL 468 will require a longer, more sophisticated term paper, and additional class presentation. Offered as ANTH 367, BIOL 368, EEPS 367, PHIL 367, ANAT 467, ANTH 467, BIOL 468, EEPS 467, PHIL 467 and PHOL 467. Prereq: PHIL 225 or equivalent.
PHIL 371	Advanced Bioethics	3 Units	This course offers upper-level instruction on many key bioethical issues introduced in BETH/PHIL 271.  The class follows a discussion-intensive seminar format.  Students begin with an in-depth analysis of ethical issues surrounding the conduct of clinical trials, both within the U.S. and through U.S.-sponsored research abroad.  Next students examine the philosophical and practical challenges involved in medical decision making for adults and pediatric patients.  This course concludes by addressing the broader ethical problem of what duties we owe to future generations in terms of our reproductive choices and the allocation of health-related public expenditures.  Each of these general topic areas - clinical trials, medical decision making, and future generations - is of crucial importance for all students whether one plans to enter a career in biomedical research, the healthcare professions, or some other career path.  Everyone is a potential patient or the family member of a potential patient.  The topics covered in Advanced Bioethics will help prepare students to become responsible participants in an increasingly complex biomedical world.  Offered as BETH 371 and PHIL 371. Prereq: BETH 271 or PHIL 271.
PHIL 375	Issues in Aesthetics	3 Units	This course will seek to offer insight into the nature of artistic expression, the role of criticism in the arts, and the place of the arts in society.  The term "arts" will be construed broadly to include painting, photography, theater, film, music, dance, poetry, etc.  The following are examples of questions we will discuss.  What does the term "beautiful" mean?  Are there other measures of aesthetic value besides beauty?  Do the arts, like the sciences, offer us knowledge of the world?  What value do the arts have for society?  Can aesthetic value conflict with moral value?  Do artists have a responsibility to society?  Should art ever be censored? What is the relationship between art and entertainment?  Is the meaning and value of an artistic work a matter of individual opinion?  What is the purpose of art critics?  How are interpretations and evaluations of art influenced by race, gender, class, etc.?  What is creativity in the arts?  Does it differ from creativity in the sciences?  How important is originality in art?  Offered as PHIL 375 and PHIL 475. Prereq: PHIL 101 or requisite not met permission.
PHIL 384	Ethics and Public Policy	3 Units	Evaluation of ethical arguments in contemporary public policymaking discourse.  That is, approaches to evaluating not only the efficiency of policy (Will this policy achieve its end for the least cost?) but also the ethics of policy (Are a policy's intended ends ethically justified or "good," and are our means to achieve those ends moral or "just"?).  Overview of political ideologies that supply U.S. political actors with their ethical or moral arguments when proposing and implementing public policy, followed by an application of these differing perspectives to selected policy areas such as welfare, euthanasia, school choice, drug laws, censorship, or others. Offered as PHIL 384, PHIL 484, POSC 384 and POSC 484.
PHIL 392	Empathic Leadership	3 Units	Leadership can be challenging. A good leader not only keeps their team on task, but also uses empathy and emotional intelligence to inspire, motivate, create a sense of psychological safety, and help team members develop. The course has two goals: 1) Students experience a development leadership role by acting in the role of a trainee facilitator and coach who guides and supports others as they engage in a variety of personal development exercises. 2) Students reflect on their leadership experiences, compare them to the experiences of others, and integrate it with academic scholarship relating to empathy, coaching, and emotionally intelligent leadership. The first goal is performative. Grading is based on engagement in the role and impact on coachees. The second goal combines personal reflection and academic scholarship, culminating in an essay. This course will be of value to those who are interested in developing their skills in helping professions and roles, including those of: coach, therapist, teacher, nurse, doctor, manager, and parent. Prereq: PHIL 222.
PHIL 396	Undergraduate Research in Evolutionary Biology	3 Units	Students propose and conduct guided research on an aspect of evolutionary biology. The research will be sponsored and supervised by a member of the CASE faculty or other qualified professional. A written report must be submitted to the Evolutionary Biology Steering Committee before credit is granted. Offered as ANTH 396, BIOL 396, EEPS 396, and PHIL 396.
PHIL 397	Directed Study	3 Units	Under faculty supervision, students will undertake a project that demonstrates critical thinking, has clear goals, features periodic reporting of progress, and will result in a final report.
PHIL 398	Philosophy Capstone	3 Units	Under faculty supervision, students will undertake a project that demonstrates critical thinking, has clear goals, features periodic reporting of progress, and will result in a final report and public presentation. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
PHIL 399	Philosophy Honors Thesis	3 Units	Under faculty supervision, students will complete a substantial thesis that demonstrates critical thinking, has clear goals, features periodic reporting of progress, and will be the subject of an oral examination as well as a public presentation. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
PHIL 405	Ethics	3 Units	Analysis of ethical theories and concepts of goodness, right, and obligation. Discussion of nature of justice, problem of justification of moral principles, and relation between facts and values. Offered as PHIL 305 and PHIL 405.
PHIL 406	Mathematical Logic and Model Theory	3 Units	Propositional calculus and quantification theory; consistency and completeness theorems; Gödel incompleteness results and their philosophical significance; introduction to basic concepts of model theory; problems of formulation of arguments in philosophy and the sciences. Offered as PHIL 306, MATH 406 and PHIL 406.
PHIL 411	Science of Ethics: The Neuroscience, Psychology, and Behavioral Economics of Morality	3 Units	Ethics is traditionally a branch of Philosophy. However, research in neuroscience, psychology and behavioral economics is shedding new light on the underlying bases of ethical behavior and ethical thinking. The class will examine how this work informs and enriches traditional philosophical ethics. Topical focus of the class will depend on student interest, but potentially include: What determines how ethically we behave: our character or our situation? What role do and should emotions play in ethical thinking? Can science tell us whether utilitarian or deontological ethics is better? The dark tetrad: narcissism, Machiavellianism, psychopathy and; sadism. What is empathy and what roles does it play in generating both ethical and unethical behavior. Varieties of moral disengagement, including dehumanizing. Cognitive dissonance and the slide into unethical behavior. Radicalization into violent extremism. Promoting ethical behavior. Offered as PHIL 311 and PHIL 411.
PHIL 413	Philosophy of Mathematics	3 Units	Logical paradoxes and their effects on foundations of mathematics. Status of mathematical entities and nature of mathematical truths. Formalist, logicist, and intuitionist positions. Recommended preparation: PHIL 101 or PHIL 201. Offered as PHIL 313 and PHIL 413.
PHIL 415	Selected Topics in Philosophy	3 Units	Examination of views of a major philosopher or philosophical school, a significant philosophical topic, or a topic that relates to philosophy and other discipline. Recommended preparation: PHIL 101. Offered as PHIL 315 and PHIL 415. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
PHIL 417	War and Morality	3 Units	The aim of this course is to explore a wide range of ethical issues relating to the decision to take a nation to war, how wars are conducted, and efforts to establish order in the wake of a conflict.  Topics include the Just War tradition, pacifism, humanitarian intervention, moral repair and the establishment of a just peace, conduct of war, warrior codes, warrior transitions, and civil-military relations.  We will be examining the ethics of war from the perspectives of both states and individuals.  War is a crucible that strips those caught up in its horrors down to their fundamental selves inspiring acts of both inhuman depravity and seemingly superhuman nobility.  This course is presented in a seminar format with lively discussions centering on contemporary readings in military ethics from texts and journals.   Offered as PHIL 317, PHIL 417, and LAWS 5135.
PHIL 423	Empathy in Theory and Practice	3 Units	This course understands 'empathy' broadly, to include not only the sharing of emotion with others but also our capacities for perspective taking, intersubjectivity, narrative comprehension, aesthetic appreciation, and ethical reasoning. These forms of empathic reasoning are both neurologically and psychologically distinct from the more paradigmatic forms reasoning e.g. science, logic & mathematics - they work with emotions and are essentially perspectival in nature. This class explores two complementary sides of empathy: (i) What is the theory and science behind empathy? (ii) How can we use empathy more effectively? There are no prereqs and students are not expected to have taken prior classes on empathy. Nonetheless, this is an advanced, rather than introductory or remedial, class. Students are expected to bring prior learning and/or practical expertise to contribute to a deep dive into the subject. If in any doubt, you are welcome to ask the professor. Offered as PHIL 323 and PHIL 423.
PHIL 425	Philosophy of Feminism	3 Units	Dimensions of gender difference. Definition of feminism. Critical examination of feminist critiques of culture, including especially politics, ideology, epistemology, ethics, and psychology. Readings from traditional and contemporary sources.  Offered as PHIL 325, PHIL 425 and WGST 325. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
PHIL 426	Religion, Global Health, and Human Rights	3 Units	Global Health is an interdisciplinary field concerned with improving health and achieving equity in health for all people, worldwide, focusing on transnational health issues, identifying determinants, and proposing solutions. This course examines issues in global health and human rights and considers the contributions religious ethics may make in analyzing and evaluating such issues. In the first half of the course, we will familiarize ourselves with theoretical issues including what a human right is, whether there's a human right to health, what socially determines health, and how religion relates to global health. In the second half the course, we will turn to practical issues in global health: women, maternal, and reproductive health; neonatal and pediatric health; access to medication and the right to health; emergency relief and humanitarian aid; and access to freshwater. We will conclude by considering the future of global health. Over the course of the semester, we will also become familiar with religious ethics and the relationship among religious ethics, global health, and human rights. In doing so, students will learn about the foundations for religion, global health, and human rights as they intersect with care for individuals and communities in our interconnected and globalized world. Offered as RLGN 326, RLGN 426, PHIL 326 and PHIL 426. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
PHIL 430	Topics in Ethics	3 Units	Examination of views in ethics of a major philosopher or philosophical school, a significant philosophical topic in ethics, or a topic that relates ethics to philosophy and another discipline. Recommended preparation: PHIL 101 or PHIL 205. Offered as PHIL 330 and PHIL 430.
PHIL 433	Philosophy of Religion	3 Units	Topics include: classical and contemporary arguments for God's existence; divine foreknowledge and human freedom; the problem of evil and theodicy; nature and significance of religious experience; mysticism; varieties of religious metaphysics; knowledge, belief and faith; nature of religious discourse. Readings from traditional and contemporary sources. Recommended preparation for PHIL 433 and RLGN 433: PHIL 101 or RLGN 102. Offered as PHIL 333, RLGN 333, PHIL 433, and RLGN 433.
PHIL 434	Political and Social Philosophy	3 Units	Justification of social institutions, primarily political ones. Such distinctions as that between de facto and legitimate authority; analysis of criteria for evaluation, such as social justice and equality; inquiry into theories of justification of the state; theory of democratic government and its alternatives. Readings from classical and contemporary sources. Recommended preparation: PHIL 101. Offered as PHIL 334, POSC 354, PHIL 434, and POSC 454.
PHIL 435	Philosophy of Law	3 Units	This is an examination of the general nature of law, the broad concerns of jurisprudence, the study of comparative law, and many of the issues raised in the literature of legal philosophy. Students will examine the principles of legal positivism, mitigated natural law, and rights theory. Selected readings and cases will illustrate these theories, which will also be examined in the context of rule selection by new governments in developing or revolutionary societies. The course also looks at the general nature of legal systems: how politics, morality, and individual views of justice and rights affect particular court cases and the course and development of law generally. Topics will include abortion, obscenity and sin, civil disobedience, affirmative action, surrogatehood, and the death penalty. This is unlike any other of the legal theory or jurisprudence courses, and those who have sampled legal theory elsewhere in a different form are welcome and encouraged to enroll. Recommended preparation: PHIL 101. Offered as LAWS 5747, PHIL 335, and PHIL 435.
PHIL 436	Military Ethics, the Military Profession, and International Law	3 Units	The aim of this course is to provide a foundational understanding of international law as it relates to war and to explore the relationship between international law, military ethics, and the military profession.  In addition to traditional lectures and seminar-style discussions, this hybrid course will feature video lectures by international experts in the field of military ethics and online assignments, discussion sections led by the Visiting Distinguished Inamori Scholar in Military Ethics.  Topics covered will concern the international legal framework pertaining to the use of force, viewed through the prism of a professional code of conduct that has been forged over centuries, across different warrior cultures. Offered as PHIL 336 and PHIL 436. Prereq: PHIL 317 or PHIL 417.
PHIL 445	Epistemology and Metaphysics	3 Units	Traditional problems of epistemology, such as definition of knowledge, justification of belief, nature of evidence and foundationalism, skepticism, the a priori, and the role of sense perception in knowledge. Metaphysical presuppositions and implications of epistemological views. Forms of realism and anti-realism. Recommended preparation: PHIL 101. Offered as PHIL 345 and PHIL 445.
PHIL 456	Comparative Philosophy	3 Units	Philosophy in the etymological sense of the term, love of wisdom, subsumes ontological, ethical and epistemological inquires addressing fundamental questions about reality, the place of humans in that reality, the values of things and human obligations, and the sources of knowledge.  The major purpose of this course is to discover, understand, explicate and articulate the affinities and differences in the way the fundamental questions are addressed in different cultural contexts, thereby to appreciate the cross-cultural kinship among human minds as well as to be challenged by the differences that may engender conflicts.  We will explore the possibility of building a trans-cultural meta-cultural meta-discourse in which thinkers from many traditions can participate on equal footing.  We will come to face up to the question whether truly universal philosophy is possible, upon what conditions.  Representative texts from the Western, Chinese and Buddhist traditions including selected works of Plato, Aristotle, Augustine, Descartes, Kant, Nietzsche, Heidegger, Lao Tzu, Confucius, Chuang Tzu, Dhammapada of the Buddha and D. Suzuki's Zen Buddhism will be read. Offered as PHIL 356 and PHIL 456. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
PHIL 457	Christian Bioethics	3 Units	Bioethics is concerned with both clinical and population level healthcare issues. Christian Bioethics aims to integrate the discipline of theology with the field of bioethics to critically evaluate the goals of healthcare and the practices associated with these goals. This course examines the theological sources used to evaluate contemporary clinical and population level healthcare issues. We will examine issues including abortion, end-of-life care, genetic enhancement, the concept of disability, health inequalities and justice, and personal and social responsibility for health, especially as these relate to political and social justice. We will also become familiar with religious moral reasoning and the relationship between religious ethics and nonreligious moral and political philosophy. In doing so, students will learn about the foundations for religion, medicine, and ethics as they intersect with care for individuals and communities. Offered as BETH 357, BETH 457, PHIL 357, PHIL 457, RLGN 357 and RLGN 457.
PHIL 466	Brain, Mind and Consciousness: The Science and Philosophy of Mind	3 Units	The course introduces students to key topics in philosophy of mind from the perspective of our increasingly advanced scientific understanding of mind and brain (e.g. derived from neuroscience, psychology and cognitive science). Key philosophical topics covered include dualism, physicalism, idealism, consciousness and free will. Key scientific issues covered include methods and assumptions underlying research in psychology and neuroscience, introspection, essentialism, dehumanizing, and work on free will and consciousness. No pre-requisites other than curiosity are required, however students will benefit from having previously taken courses in philosophy, neuroscience, psychology and/or computer science. Students are expected to complete the assigned readings with care and attention, and to participate in discussion. The goal is for students to leave with an understanding of the rich ways in which different approaches can shed light on the human mind, including an appreciation of the limits of scientific inquiry into the mind. Offered as PHIL 366 and PHIL 466.
PHIL 467	Topics in Evolutionary Biology	3 Units	The focus for this course on a special topic of interest in evolutionary biology will vary from one offering to the next. Examples of possible topics include theories of speciation, the evolution of language, the evolution of sex, evolution and biodiversity, molecular evolution. ANAT/ANTH/EEPS/PHIL/PHOL 467/BIOL 468 will require a longer, more sophisticated term paper, and additional class presentation. Offered as ANTH 367, BIOL 368, EEPS 367, PHIL 367, ANAT 467, ANTH 467, BIOL 468, EEPS 467, PHIL 467 and PHOL 467.
PHIL 475	Issues in Aesthetics	3 Units	This course will seek to offer insight into the nature of artistic expression, the role of criticism in the arts, and the place of the arts in society.  The term "arts" will be construed broadly to include painting, photography, theater, film, music, dance, poetry, etc.  The following are examples of questions we will discuss.  What does the term "beautiful" mean?  Are there other measures of aesthetic value besides beauty?  Do the arts, like the sciences, offer us knowledge of the world?  What value do the arts have for society?  Can aesthetic value conflict with moral value?  Do artists have a responsibility to society?  Should art ever be censored? What is the relationship between art and entertainment?  Is the meaning and value of an artistic work a matter of individual opinion?  What is the purpose of art critics?  How are interpretations and evaluations of art influenced by race, gender, class, etc.?  What is creativity in the arts?  Does it differ from creativity in the sciences?  How important is originality in art?  Offered as PHIL 375 and PHIL 475.
PHIL 484	Ethics and Public Policy	3 Units	Evaluation of ethical arguments in contemporary public policymaking discourse.  That is, approaches to evaluating not only the efficiency of policy (Will this policy achieve its end for the least cost?) but also the ethics of policy (Are a policy's intended ends ethically justified or "good," and are our means to achieve those ends moral or "just"?).  Overview of political ideologies that supply U.S. political actors with their ethical or moral arguments when proposing and implementing public policy, followed by an application of these differing perspectives to selected policy areas such as welfare, euthanasia, school choice, drug laws, censorship, or others. Offered as PHIL 384, PHIL 484, POSC 384 and POSC 484.
PHIL 499	Independent Study MA Level	1 - 3 Units	This course enables graduate students in departments or interdisciplinary programs with an MA to pursue intensive directed study with a faculty member in Philosophy.  Students should consult with the Instructor and with their MA director or graduate program director before enrolling. Prereq: Graduate Standing.
PHIL 501	Military Ethics MA Capstone	3 - 6 Units	This Military Ethics MA capstone course will feature a summative project designed to integrate the students' common studies for the MA program, while being tailored to their individual future interests in teaching, further graduate study, or employment in public policy or foreign affairs. The capstone project, culminating in a paper, may involve both academic research and fieldwork, integrated with the degree-candidate's professional experience or interest.    If the student opts to write a more traditional thesis, then the paper should be approximately 10,000-20,000 words. The write up for a more project-based capstone should be approximately 5,000 words. An example of such a non-thesis project would be to design and defend a military ethics curriculum to use for PME (professional military education), domestically or internationally, including justifications of which readings, case studies, examples, theories, and principles to include, and which to exclude, and why, based on work in the field of Military Ethics.   In either case, the outline of the capstone project must be presented to and accepted by a professor or instructor in the MA program who is willing to serve as the student's capstone advisor. The Master's capstone should build on the relevant elective courses by each candidate (in consultation with program faculty) around an appropriate area of concentration (e.g., military medicine and ethics; military law and ethics; psychology, history, or literature).  Distribution of the 6 credits over one or two semesters will be decided through consultation with the student's MA advisor.  This course will also fulfill the SAGES capstone requirement for undergraduate students enrolled in the Military Ethics MA through the IGS program.  For these students, the capstone must be presented publicly either at Intersections or at an annual Philosophy Department event for other capstones and honors theses. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
PHIL 599	Neuroscience of Positive Change: Using Brain Imaging to Promote the Good Life	1.5 Unit	The brain is the primary organ responsible for learning, decision making, social interaction, happiness, and self-regulation. Hence, neuroscience has the potential to inform numerous applied disciplines. Over the last few decades, fields from Organizational Behavior to Social Work, and Ethics to Nursing, have increasingly been drawing upon findings from neuroscience to inform their discipline. Researchers working in these disciplines are also now starting to conduct their own neuroscientific studies. However, applied researchers face an education gap that hinders progress in the productive use of neuroscience to inform their discipline. This course will provide an introduction to neuroscience methods for applied researchers, with a focus on how neuroscience can inform interventions designed to produce positive change in individuals. Students will gain an overview of the basic methods of cognitive neuroscience, effective experimental design, and the challenges of interpretation. In addition, students will be introduced to current research on the neuroscience of motivation, social-emotional competencies and behavior change. This is a graduate seminar class. Students must do the reading ahead of class. The majority of class time will be devoted to discussion.
PHIL 699	Advanced Tutorial and Dissertation for Candidates in fields related to Philosophy	1 - 3 Units	This course enables students in departments offering the Ph.D. to pursue intensive directed study with a faculty member in Philosophy, on philosophical aspects of their dissertation topic.  Students should consult with the instructor and with their dissertation director before enrolling.
PHED 100	Independent Activity	0 - 10 Units	This course is designed to allow the student to write individual fitness goals, compose an individual fitness program specific to the goals and execute the individual program. Students are required to participate in a pre- and post-testing program and must achieve a minimum of 75% for each test component (national norms) in order to participate in Independent Activity. The course instructor must approve all programs. The student will be required to maintain a detailed activity log.
PHED 108	Fencing	0 Unit	Fencing is the art of swordsmanship. Students will learn fencing skills such as on guard, lunge, attack, parry and touch. Students will learn the rules of competition and have the opportunity to compete during class time.
PHED 10A	Cardio Games (First Half)	0 Unit	Cardio Games emphasizes conditioning of the aerobic and anaerobic systems through fun and energetic games such as Ultimate Frisbee, Tag, Dodge Ball, Flicker Ball and more. This class is appropriate for most students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 10B	Cardio Games (Second Half)	0 Unit	Cardio Games emphasizes conditioning of the aerobic and anaerobic systems through fun and energetic games such as Ultimate Frisbee, Tag, Dodge Ball, Flicker Ball and more.  This class is appropriate for most students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 12A	Badminton (First Half)	0 Unit	This class provides the student with the basic skills, footwork and strategies necessary to play the sport of badminton. Emphasis is placed on skill development through instruction and drills as well as singles and doubles match play.  This class is appropriate for all students.  Students with special needs can be accommodated. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 12B	Badminton (Second Half)	0 Unit	This class provides the student with the basic skills, footwork and strategies necessary to play the sport of badminton. Emphasis is placed on skill development through instruction and drills as well as singles and doubles match play.  This class is appropriate for all students.  Students with special needs can be accommodated. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 130	Wellness	0 Unit	This lecture class teaches the components of physical fitness as well as evaluation techniques, fitness assessment, body composition, nutrition and weight control information. This class is appropriate for all students.
PHED 131	Personal Fitness	0 Unit	Personal Fitness is a full semester class that teaches the components of physical fitness through both lecture and activity. Students will assess their fitness levels and learn conditioning activities to improve flexibility, cardiovascular endurance, muscular strength and endurance. Nutrition, weight control and concepts of wellness are covered in this class. This class is appropriate for most students.
PHED 13A	Rock Wall Climbing (First Half)	0 Unit	This course is designed to give students a comprehensive introduction to the skills, safely, terminology and equipment used in the sport of recreational activity of rock climbing. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 13B	Rock Wall Climbing (Second Half)	0 Unit	This course is designed to give students a comprehensive introduction to the skills, safely, terminology and equipment used in the sport of recreational activity of rock climbing. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 141	Dance	0 Unit	This course is designed to introduce the student to dance. Students will be exposed to a variety of dances including contemporary, jazz, folk and formal dancing. Students will learn how choreography is mounted and how dancers remember it. The class is appropriate for beginners as well as students with dance experience.
PHED 14B	Indoor Rowing (Second Half)	0 Unit	This course introduces the student to basic indoor rowing techniques, skills, and equipment. Students will learn conditioning programs to prepare the student to continue in recreational, fitness or competitive rowing programs. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 170	Varsity Baseball	0 Unit	
PHED 171	Varsity Basketball (Men)	0 Unit	
PHED 172	Varsity Basketball (Women)	0 Unit	
PHED 174	Varsity Cross Country (Men)	0 Unit	
PHED 175	Varsity Cross Country (Women)	0 Unit	
PHED 178	Varsity Football	0 Unit	
PHED 180	Varsity Soccer (Men)	0 Unit	
PHED 181	Varsity Soccer (Women)	0 Unit	
PHED 182	Varsity Swimming (Men)	0 Unit	
PHED 183	Varsity Swimming (Women)	0 Unit	
PHED 184	Varsity Tennis (Men)	0 Unit	
PHED 185	Varsity Tennis (Women)	0 Unit	
PHED 186	Varsity Track and Field (Men)	0 Unit	
PHED 187	Varsity Track and Field (Women)	0 Unit	
PHED 188	Varsity Volleyball	0 Unit	
PHED 189	Varsity Wrestling	0 Unit	
PHED 190	Varsity Softball (Women)	0 Unit	
PHED 218	Wellness	1 Unit	
PHED 21A	Hatha Yoga (First Half)	0 Unit	This course provides an introduction to Hatha Yoga, presenting body awareness, basic philosophy, breathwork, postures and meditation techniques. This class is appropriate for all students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 21B	Hatha Yoga (Second Half)	0 Unit	This course provides an introduction to Hatha Yoga, presenting body awareness, basic philosophy, breathwork, postures and meditation techniques. This class is appropriate for all students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 22A	Intermediate Hatha Yoga (First Half)	0 Unit	This course utilizes the basics of Hatha Yoga including body awareness, philosophy, breathwork, and postures with emphasis on increased strengthening, increased aerobic segments, and more challenging postures. This class is appropriate for all students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 22B	Intermediate Hatha Yoga (Second Half)	0 Unit	This course utilizes the basics of Hatha Yoga including body awareness, philosophy, breathwork, and postures with emphasis on increased strengthening, increased aerobic segments, and more challenging postures. This class is appropriate for all students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 24A	Jogging (First Half)	0 Unit	Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 24B	Jogging (Second Half)	0 Unit	Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 25A	Power Volleyball (First Half)	0 Unit	This class introduces volleyball skills, techniques, strategies, rules and scoring.  This class is appropriate for most students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 25B	Power Volleyball (Second Half)	0 Unit	This class introduces volleyball skills, techniques, strategies, rules and scoring.  This class is appropriate for most students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 26A	Racquetball (First Half)	0 Unit	This course teaches racquetball skills and strategies for team and individual play.  Course content includes terminology, skill development, scoring, etiquette and safety.  This class is appropriate for most students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 26B	Racquetball (Second Half)	0 Unit	This course teaches racquetball skills and strategies for team and individual play.  Course content includes terminology, skill development, scoring, etiquette and safety.  This class is appropriate for most students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 27A	Indoor Group Cycling (First Half)	0 Unit	A stationary cycling program set to motivational music. Students will learn how to use and set up the bike and how to create a challenging workout using sprints, jumps and climbs. This class is appropriate for most students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 27B	Indoor Group Cycling (Second Half)	0 Unit	A stationary cycling program set to motivational music. Students will learn how to use and set up the bike and how to create a challenging workout using sprints, jumps and climbs. This class is appropriate for most students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 29A	Swimming - Beginning and Intermediate (First Half)	0 Unit	This class focuses on basic swimming skills and safety. This class is appropriate for non-swimmers to those students with mid-range swimming skills. Students with disabilities may be accommodated. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 29B	Swimming - Beginning and Intermediate (Second Half)	0 Unit	This class focuses on basic swimming skills and safety. This class is appropriate for non-swimmers to those students with mid-range swimming skills. Students with disabilities may be accommodated. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 300	Sports Medicine Independent Study	3 Units	This independent studies course will provide sports medicine minors who experience scheduling conflicts with flexibility to complete the minor requirements.  This course may be used to complete any of the current minor requirements.
PHED 30A	Swimming - Endurance (First Half)	0 Unit	This class is for individuals who have mastered intermediate swimming skills and wish to develop advanced swimming skills and greater swimming endurance. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 30B	Swimming - Endurance (Second Half)	0 Unit	This class is for individuals who have mastered intermediate swimming skills and wish to develop advanced swimming skills and greater swimming endurance. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 31A	Tennis (First Half)	0 Unit	Students will learn the tennis skills and strategies necessary for both singles and doubles play.  Emphasis is placed on stroke development, rules, scoring and etiquette.  This class is appropriate for all students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 31B	Tennis (Second Half)	0 Unit	Students will learn the tennis skills and strategies necessary for both singles and doubles play.  Emphasis is placed on stroke development, rules, scoring and etiquette.  This class is appropriate for all students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 325	Officiating Basketball	2 Units	Administrative procedures, promotion, managerial relationships, scheduling, tournaments, budgeting, scoring systems, and officiating.
PHED 332	Introduction to Sports Medicine	3 Units	This class provides a detailed introduction to the foundation of Sports Medicine. Students will understand the complexities of sports medicine and athletic training through classroom lecture, structured laboratory and clinical hours. Topics covered in this class include roles and responsibilities of the sports medicine team, injury pathology, injury prevention, evaluation and management of injury.
PHED 334	Orthopedic Assessment of the Upper Extremity	3 Units	This class provides students with hands on experience that prepares them to perform orthopedic assessments within the field of athletic training. Students learn to take medical histories, palpate bony and soft structures, perform range of motion, neurological and circulatory tests. Students will learn to perform orthopedic tests of the upper extremities, head, cervical spine and abdomen. This class involves lectures, laboratory and clinical hours. Prereq: PHED 332 and PHED 342.
PHED 339	Orthopedic Assessment of the Lower Extremity	3 Units	This class provides students with hands on experience that prepares them to perform orthopedic assessments within the field of athletic training. Students learn to take medical histories, palpate bony and soft structures, perform range of motion, neurological and circulatory tests; and perform orthopedic special test of the lower extremities, pelvis, and lumbar spine.   This class involves lectures, labs, and clinical hours. Prereq: PHED 332 and PHED 342.
PHED 341	Physiology of Exercise	3 Units	The classroom and laboratory experiences in this class are intended to provide an understanding of physiological adaptations of the human body to acute and chronic exercise.  The classroom portion will focus mainly on the response and adaptation of bodily systems to exercise and the relationship of physiology to sport, health and exercise programs.  The laboratory portion will focus on evaluation of the physiological response to exercise. Prereq: PHED 332, PHED 342, PHED 334,  PHED 339.
PHED 342	Kinesiology	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to present the conceptual ideas and general principles of the science of human movement. It reviews and applies the pertinent aspects of anatomy, physiology and mechanics.  Subject matter is drawn from research and clinical findings of widely dispersed kinesiological subdisciplines and professional specializations. Prereq: PHED 332.
PHED 34A	Weight Training (First Half)	0 Unit	This class focuses on muscular strength and endurance training through individualized weight training programs. Emphasis is placed on appropriate use of equipment and safety procedures. This class is appropriate for most students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 34B	Weight Training (Second Half)	0 Unit	This class focuses on muscular strength and endurance training through individualized weight training programs. Emphasis is placed on appropriate use of equipment and safety procedures. This class is appropriate for most students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 350	Therapeutic Rehabilitation and Modalities	3 Units	Topics covered in this class include concepts and practices associated with the conditioning and reconditioning (rehabilitation) of athletic injuries.  Principles and practical skills associated with therapeutic modalities used in the treatment and rehabilitation of athletic injuries are also covered.  This class involves lectures, labs and clinical hours. Prereq: PHED 332, PHED 334, PHED 339, and PHED 342.
PHED 39A	Bowling (First Half)	0 Unit	This class introduces bowling skills, techniques, strategies, rules and scoring.  This class is appropriate for most students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 40A	Basketball (First Half)	0 Unit	This class introduces basketball skills, techniques, rules and basic offense and defense. This class is appropriate for most students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 40B	Basketball (Second Half)	0 Unit	This class introduces basketball skills, techniques, rules and basic offense and defense. This class is appropriate for most students.
PHED 41A	Softball (First Half)	0 Unit	This class introduces softball skills, techniques, rules and basic offense and defense strategies. This class is appropriate for most students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 41B	Softball (Second Half)	0 Unit	This class introduces softball skills, techniques, rules and basic offense and defense strategies. This class is appropriate for most students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 42B	Indoor Soccer (Second Half)	0 Unit	Students will learn the skills, techniques and strategies to play the sport of indoor soccer. This class is appropriate for most students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 44A	Core Yoga (1st Half)	0 Unit	This course combines Hatha Yoga postures, Pilates exercises, body awareness and breathwork while focusing on deep stabilizing abdominal muscles.  Students will combine stretching and strengthening to improve posture and flexibility and create balance in the physical body.  Students will learn slow, controlled movements to help tone and condition. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 44B	Core Yoga (2nd Half)	0 Unit	This course combines Hatha Yoga postures, Pilates exercises, body awareness and breathwork while focusing on deep stabilizing abdominal muscles.  Students will combine stretching and strengthening to improve posture and flexibility and create balance in the physical body.  Students will learn slow, controlled movements to help tone and condition. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 50A	Personal Safety Awareness (First Half)	0 Unit	This class focuses on safety and preventative techniques. Emphasis is placed on self-protection. This class is appropriate for all students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 50B	Personal Safety Awareness (Second Half)	0 Unit	This class focuses on safety and preventative techniques. Emphasis is placed on self-protection. This class is appropriate for all students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 55A	Cardio-Fitness (First Half)	0 Unit	This class presents the components of physical fitness through conditioning activities utilizing equipment such as stairclimbers, treadmills, and elliptical trainers. Students will evaluate their fitness levels and learn how to put together an individualized workout program. This class is appropriate for all students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 55B	Cardio-Fitness (Second Half)	0 Unit	This class presents the components of physical fitness through conditioning activities utilizing equipment such as stairclimbers, treadmills, and elliptical trainers. Students will evaluate their fitness levels and learn how to put together an individualized workout program. This class is appropriate for all students. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 60A	CPR/First Aid (1st half)	0 Unit	Students will learn the basic first aid and CPR skills necessary to act in an emergency.  Automated external defibrillation training is included.  This class involves both lecture and hands-on work.  Students will have the opportunity to achieve Basic Rescuer certification at the completion of the class.
PHED 60B	CPR/First Aid (2nd half)	0 Unit	Students will learn the basic first aid and CPR skills necessary to act in an emergency.  Automated external defibrillation training in included.  This class involves both lecture and hands-on work.  Students will have the opportunity to achieve Basic Rescuer certification at the completion of this class.
PHED 65B	Team Building, Leadership, and Creative Movement (2nd half)	0 Unit	The primary purpose of this course is to provide an opportunity for Orientation leaders to:  work as a team and build transferable skills for collaboration, active listening, communication, and motivation;  learn dance movement as a form of communication and stress reduction; create the Orientation Leader Boogie Dance (performed at Welcome Days tradition and football game halftime show); understand the value in personal decision making and awareness (stress reduction, drug/alcohol awareness, sexual assault, etc.); learn campus resources; build Orientation Leader esprit de corps and enhance school spirit.  This course will develop more effective and competent university ambassadors.  In addition, the course will facilitate the development of leadership skills.
PHED 66A	Advanced Rowing (First Half)	0 Unit	This course is designed to enhance the rowing technique of the experienced rower. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 66B	Advanced Rowing (Second Half)	0 Unit	This course is designed to enhance the rowing technique of the experienced rower. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 67A	Personal Self Defense (First Half)	0 Unit	Students will learn how to defend themselves, and others, from bodily harm against hostile actions. They will learn how to use reasonable force, avoiding injury, and how to overcome their aggressor/aggressors. The course is designed for all students and they will be provided with in-depth knowledge about Self Defense. Students will expand their knowledge about pressure points, identify Self Defense techniques acceptable by Ohio State Law and the policies of CWRU, develop skills in preventative and situational awareness, develop attack skills, falling safety, escape techniques and safe training practices. Furthermore, students will gain knowledge, needed to avoid being victimized by assailants. Training methods will be used to challenge students both physically and mentally. It will strengthen the student to deal with confrontations under stressful conditions. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 67B	Personal Self Defense (Second Half)	0 Unit	Students will learn how to defend themselves, and others, from bodily harm against hostile actions. They will learn how to use reasonable force, avoiding injury, and how to overcome their aggressor/aggressors. The course is designed for all students and they will be provided with in-depth knowledge about Self Defense. Students will expand their knowledge about pressure points, identify Self Defense techniques acceptable by Ohio State Law and the policies of CWRU, develop skills in preventative and situational awareness, develop attack skills, falling safety, escape techniques and safe training practices. Furthermore, students will gain knowledge, needed to avoid being victimized by assailants. Training methods will be used to challenge students both physically and mentally. It will strengthen the student to deal with confrontations under stressful conditions. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 68A	Pickleball (First Half)	0 Unit	The purpose of Pickleball class is to introduce students to the rules and regulations of the game of Pickleball.  Various strategies, techniques, and a lot of live play will also be what drives the class. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PHED 68B	Pickleball (Second Half)	0 Unit	The purpose of Pickleball class is to introduce students to the rules and regulations of the game of Pickleball.  Various strategies, techniques, and a lot of live play will also be what drives the class. Prereq: Undergraduate degree seeking student.
PAST 401	Foundations of Clinical Medicine-Principles of Interviewing	3 Units	The general purpose of this course is to teach the physician assistant student the skills necessary to conduct a clinical/medical interview with a patient and to be able to present the information to other health care professionals in both an oral and written form.  This course, which is designed as small, group seminars, will focus on the skills necessary to question patients in a directed fashion and to listen to the patient with concern and empathy.  Instruction will emphasize what data is needed in a complete medical history as well as the focused interview, the proper technique for gathering information, and the format for presentation of the data.  Instructional techniques will include role-playing, small group discussion, and observation and critique by instructors, other students and simulated patient models. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 402	Physical Diagnosis	4 Units	This lecture/discussion/laboratory course presents and explores the techniques for performing a complete and competent physical examination, understanding the pathophysiology presented by the patient, and organizing and reporting the findings in both written and oral format. Synthesis of historical and physical presentations for an accurate evaluation of the patient will be emphasized. The problem-oriented physical examination and special examination tools and techniques will be presented. Instructional techniques will include small group discussion, practical experience with other students and faculty, and the observation and critique of physical examination skills by faculty. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 403	Diagnostic Methods-Clinical Lab	1 Unit	This course is designed to introduce the student to clinical laboratory and diagnostic medicine. Lectures are designed to review the various types of laboratory tests, acquisition and handling of specimens, normal values as well as interpretation of results and correlation with clinical conditions. This course also includes an introduction to radiology, microbiology and electrocardiogram interpretation. The skills learned here carry over to the principles of medicine series in subsequent semesters. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 404	Clinical Correlations	1 Unit	This seminar course places emphasis on internal organs with clinical correlation to anatomic conditions.  Content will include basic concepts of genetics, the comparison of normal and abnormal structural relationships and the demonstration of how these things relate to health and disease.  Students will review on-line genetics learning modules and meet in small seminar groups to review anatomical clinical correlates. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 405	Medical Microbiology & Infectious Disease	2 Units	This course is the study of microorganisms and the diseases they cause in man.  It includes consideration of infectious disease microorganisms including their biochemical, serological and virulence characteristics, and clinical manifestations. An organ system approach is used to examine the fundamentals of pathogenicity, host response, epidemiological aspects of infectious disease, as well as clinical manifestations, diagnosis and treatment of infections with clinical correlations. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 406	Ethics in Healthcare Delivery	1 Unit	This course is an overview of the discipline of medical ethics presenting the study and application of relevant principles, insights, and understandings of modern medical practice.  The course includes a brief overview of ethical theories which lay the foundation for subsequent investigation into specific ethical problems found in medical science and technology. The purpose of the course is to provide a framework which enables the student to reason clearly and effectively about the ethics involved in medical science and technology. The course assumes no prior knowledge of philosophical ethics or medical science.  A framework of ethical decision making is introduced and practiced using realistic medical cases via seminar discussion. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 407	Clinical Procedures	4 Units	The purpose is to prepare these future clinicians for clinical management of health and disease by preparing them for common clinical procedures. These will include basic and advanced surgical skills, basic laboratory skills, common out-patient procedures, common emergency procedures, and interpretation of common radiologic tests. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 410	Cadaver Dissection-based Human Anatomy with Histology and Physiologic Correlations	6 Units	This course will provide students with a sound understanding of the normal human body as a foundation for subsequent pursuing biomedical careers. The gross anatomy component will give a full breakdown of all gross aspects of the human body and the associated systems, while also including cadaver dissection-based laboratories. The histology component will provide students with an understanding of the structural and functional organization of the human body at the cellular and subcellular levels. The embryology component will briefly discuss the major systems and how they form within a developing embryo. This course is well-suited to all biomedical careers, including pre-clinical and biomedical undergraduates, post-baccalaureate, pre-clinical master of science graduate programs, plus medical and dental students seeking additional training in the anatomical sciences. It will meet any of the anatomy-oriented prerequisites being implemented for medical and dental school applications, including those preferring or requiring a cadaver-based experience. The assessments will include a combination of written and cadaver-based practical questions. Offered as ANAT 410 and PAST 410. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 411	Professional Issues for PA's-History & Roles of the PA I	1 Unit	In this three course series students explore, through lecture and discussion, the factors affecting the development of the profession and role socialization with emphasis on history and regulations/organizations governing PA practice. An overview of clinical responsibilities, team based practice, the PA role, and licensing/credentialing practices will be presented and discussed. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 412	Professional Issues for Physician Assistants II	2 Units	In this three course series students will explore factors affecting the development of the profession, the status of the PA in the U.S. healthcare system and current issues in clinical practice including practice-based improvement and systems-based practice.  Through lecture and discussion, this series prepares the student for the transition from classroom to clinical training and clinical practice.  Emphasis is given to the responsibilities that come with being a professional, professionalism and practicing quality improvement. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 413	Professional Issues for Physician Assistants III	2 Units	In this three course series students will explore factors affecting the development of the profession, the status of the PA in the U.S. healthcare system and current issues in clinical practice including practice-based improvement and systems-based practice.  Through lecture and discussion, this series prepares the student for the transition from classroom to clinical training and clinical practice.  Emphasis is given to the responsibilities that come with being a professional, professionalism and practicing quality improvement. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 420	Pharmacology I	2 Units	In this two course series, (PAST 421 Pharmacology II) students will be provided with a basic introduction to the principles of pharmacology and to drug classes of particular relevance to the physician assistant.  Information concerning drug doses and calculations used in determining doses will be included in this course and PAST 421 Pharmacology. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 421	Pharmacology II	3 Units	In this two course series (PAST 420 Pharmacology), physician assistant students will be provided with foundational knowledge of the therapeutic uses and effects of drugs. The indications, contraindications and adverse effects of prototypical drugs are covered. Drug dependence and addiction are also discussed. This course also includes a problem-based learning component which will enhance students' teamwork and clinical reasoning skills by examining and analyzing case scenarios in small groups. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 430	Principles of Internal Medicine	7 Units	This one semester lecture/discussion course provides students with a detailed study of the etiology, pathophysiology, signs, symptoms, diagnosis and treatment of various disorders encountered in internal medicine. A broad array of diseases in cardiology, dermatology, endocrinology, gastroenterology, gerontology, hepatology, hematology, oncology, urology, nephrology, neurology, pulmonology and rheumatology are explored. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 431	Principles of Clinical Medicine-Surgery & Emergency Medicine	4 Units	This one semester lecture course presents the fundamentals of surgical disease and care of the acutely injured and ill patients. The purpose is to familiarize the student with the etiology, anatomy, pathophysiology, clinical manifestations and appropriate diagnosis and treatment of selected surgical conditions and conditions encountered in the surgical subspecialty and emergency medical settings. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 432	Principles of Clinical Medicine-OB/GYN	3 Units	This lecture/case presentation course gives the student an overview of commonly encountered obstetric and gynecologic disorders.  Anatomy and physiology of the human reproduction system are examined, including the changes in pregnancy, prenatal care, medical and surgical complications of pregnancy, pre- and postpartum care.  Common gynecologic conditions, methods and effectiveness of contraception, cancer detection methods and the diagnosis and treatment of sexually transmitted infections in the female are explored. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 433	Principles of Clinical Medicine-Pediatrics	3 Units	This course introduces the student to a unique, complex and challenging field of pediatrics.  It emphasizes aspects of general pediatrics and provides a foundation for those students who elect to further study the health care of infants, children and adolescents.  This course addresses issues unique to childhood and adolescence by focusing on human developmental biology, and by emphasizing the impact of family, community, and society on child health and well-being.  Additionally, it focuses on the impact of disease and its treatment on the developing human, and emphasizes growth and development, principles of health supervision, and recognition of common health problems. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 434	Principles of Clinical Medicine-Behavioral Medicine	2 Units	This one semester course gives students an overview of some of the most important areas in behavioral psychiatry.  This course is an overview of basic psychiatric concepts and focuses on assessing patients who manifest psychological symptoms.  Topics include diagnosis and treatment of anxiety disorders, mood disorders, common child and adolescent disorders, somatoform and factitious disorders, psychotic disorders, sleep disorders, adjustment and personality disorders, and drug and alcohol abuse and addresses forensic issues in behavioral health. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 440	Pre-Clinical Clerkships I	1 Unit	This course/clerkship provides the student with clinical experience at clinical sites in the didactic year utilizing what was learned in Foundations of Clinical Medicine (Interviewing and Physical Diagnosis class/lab). During the pre-clinical time at program designated sites, students will continue to develop and apply their history and physical exam skills, interpersonal skills, oral presentation and medical documentation skills. For expanding skills and creating relationships within the community, this course also encompasses community service, experiential learning and interprofessional education activities. This course/clerkship will help to better prepare students to gain experience and develop confidence in approaching patients prior to entering the clinical year. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 441	Pre-Clinical Clerkships II	1 Unit	This course/clerkship provides the student with clinical experience at clinical sites in the didactic year utilizing what was learned in Foundations of Clinical Medicine (Interviewing and Physical Diagnosis class/lab). During the pre-clinical time at program designated sites, students will continue to develop and apply their history and physical exam skills, interpersonal skills, oral presentation and medical documentation skills. For expanding skills and creating relationships within the community, this course also encompasses community service, experiential learning and interprofessional education activities.  This course/clerkship will help to better prepare students to gain experience and develop confidence in approaching patients prior to entering the clinical year. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 450	Culture and Health	2 Units	This lecture/discussion course provides students with a detailed understanding of the societal and individual prejudices, preconceptions, and biases that enter into the clinical interaction and how to develop appropriate responses and coping strategies.  This course provides the student with common psychosocial problems encountered by health professionals today.  Students explore issues related to sexuality, cultural competency, multicultural health, cross-cultural communication, and healthcare disparities. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 451	Introduction to Public Health	1 Unit	This course will introduce students to concepts of public health and provide experience in public health by completion of a project.  The course will enhance the student's knowledge of the history and philosophy of public health, the Healthy People 2030 initiatives and the social determinants of health and how they can be impacted.  Teaching methodologies will include discussion, lecture and development of a public health project. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 452	Introduction to Evidence Based Medicine	2 Units	This course is intended to provide learners with a basic understanding of the principles of epidemiology, biostatistics and evidence-based medicine. The course involves analysis of prospective and retrospective studies, cross-sectional studies and experimental epidemiology. It will focus on epidemiological scenarios that relate to both infectious disease and chronic disease. In addition, the course will provide the student with a basic understanding of the application of statistical techniques to the biological and health sciences and to demonstrate their areas of application. Emphasis will be placed on probability laws, sampling and parameter estimation, test of hypothesis, correlation, regression and analysis of variance. Finally, students will be introduced to the basic concepts of evidence-based medicine, information mastery, and critical appraisal of the medical literature. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 453	Medical Spanish Elective	1 Unit	This course will teach students the basics of Spanish as it applies to the medical field such as physical examinations, emergencies, common diseases within the Latino population, and specializations.  By familiarizing students with conversational Spanish and medical Spanish, this course will enable students to apply their learning to real-world situations, to assist in communications, and ultimately to break down the barrier between doctors and patients. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 454	Research Methods Elective	1 Unit	This lecture course introduces students to research design and scientific inquiry and provides them with the skills necessary for interpretation and critical evaluation of the medical literature. It includes a brief review of important statistical principles and methods and their application to problems in medicine and health. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 477	Human Physiology	4 Units	This lecture/seminar course takes a systems approach to the physiologic and biochemical functions of the human body, including relevant anatomical correlations. The goal is to enhance the student's fundamental knowledge in human physiology with an emphasis on physiologic concepts in relationship to health, disease and illnesses. The course will provide students with an understanding of the function, regulation and integration of the major organ systems. Small group seminars emphasize clinical application to systemic function. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 499	Independent Study	3 Units	Student must obtain approval of a supervising PAST department professor before registration.
PAST 500	Clinical Residency: Emergency Medicine Rotation	3 Units	This clinical rotation is designed to expose the student to the wide variety of problems encountered in the hospital-based emergency room setting in both the fast track and acute care sides of the emergency department.  The rotation experience includes the medical/surgical management of patients of all ages (infant to geriatric) with presenting problems that may be of a life threatening nature.   The formulation and understanding of the many and varied medical problems is accomplished via the accurate collection of data through a history and physical exam, interpretation of diagnostic testing, and the development of a plan.  The student will also be exposed to and perform diagnostic and therapeutic procedures.  These experiences will be under appropriate supervision. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 501	Clinical Residency: Family Medicine	3 Units	This clinical rotation is designed to give the student an understanding of family medicine/primary care medicine as practiced in office and/or clinic in an outpatient setting.  The student will work with patients from a variety of social, economic and cultural backgrounds across the lifespan.  They will experience continuity of care while assessing, diagnosing, monitoring, managing, referring and educating patients.  The student will be exposed to both acute and chronic problems as well as the psychosocial problems that are encountered in this setting.  Students may encounter and participate in the care of patients of all ages: pediatric, adolescent, adult and geriatric populations. The formulation and understanding of the many and varied medical problems is accomplished via the accurate collection of data through a complete history and physical exam, interpretation of diagnostic testing, formulation of a problem list, and the development of a plan for each presenting problem. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 502	Clinical Residency: Geriatrics	3 Units	This clinical rotation is designed to give the student an understanding of geriatric medicine. The understanding of the many and varied medical and psycho-social problems in geriatric patients is accomplished via the accurate collection of data through a complete history and physical examination, interpretation of diagnostic testing, formulation of a problem list, and the development of a plan for each presenting problem.  Teaching rounds and lectures may be used to introduce concepts of geriatric medicine. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 503	Clinical Residency: Internal Medicine Rotation	3 Units	This clinical rotation is designed to provide the student with an understanding of the wide variety of problems encountered in hospital-based internal medicine. The formulation and understanding of the many and varied medical problems is accomplished via the accurate collection of data through a complete history and physical exam, interpretation of diagnostic testing, formulation of a problem list, and the development of a plan for each presenting problems. Students are assigned to medical teams during their rotation.  Teaching rounds and lectures are used to introduce concepts of internal medicine. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 504	Clinical Residency: Obstetrics & Gynecology	3 Units	This clinical rotation is designed to expose the student to the variety of problems encountered in women's health care.  The focus of the learning experience is on recognition and management of common gynecological illnesses, sexually transmitted infections, family planning, birth control, and cancer of the female reproductive system and breast.  Obstetrical focus is on pregnancy, labor and delivery, and postpartum care.  The student will also have an exposure to the surgical management of gynecological and obstetric problems. Teaching rounds and lectures may be used to introduce concepts of obstetrics and gynecology. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 505	Clinical Residency: Pediatrics	3 Units	This clinical rotation is designed to emphasize care of the child from birth to adolescence.  The focus of the learning experience is on recognition and management of common childhood illnesses, assessment of variations of normal growth and development, and the counseling of parents regarding immunizations, preventative health care visits, growth and development, nutrition, injury prevention and common psycho-social problems. The formulation and understanding of the many and varied medical problems is accomplished via the accurate collection of data through a complete history and physical exam, interpretation of diagnostic testing, formulation of a problem list, and the development of a plan for each presenting problem.  Teaching rounds and lectures may be used to introduce concepts of pediatrics. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 506	Clinical Residency: Behavioral and Mental Health	3 Units	This clinical rotation is designed to give the student an understanding of the psycho-social and behavioral components of health, disease, and disability.  The student will be exposed to a variety of mental illnesses and disabilities and will also be able to recognize and categorize psychiatric disorders along with the therapeutic modalities used in their treatment.  The formulation and understanding of the varied psychiatric problems is accomplished via the accurate collection of data through a complete history and mental status exam, interpretation of diagnostic testing when appropriate, formulation of a problem list, and the development of a plan for each presenting problem.  Emphasis is placed on early recognition, intervention, and psychiatric referral and/or consultation.  Teaching rounds and lectures are used to introduce concepts of psychiatric medicine. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 507	Clinical Residency: Surgery	3 Units	This clinical rotation is designed to expose the student to the varied population with surgically manageable disease from adolescence to geriatrics.  The formulation and understanding of the varied medical problems is accomplished via the accurate collection of data through a complete history and physical exam, interpretation of diagnostic testing, formulation of a problem list, and the development of a plan.  The focus of the learning experience is on the pre-operative evaluation and preparation of the patients for surgery, procedures and assisting during the intra-operative period, and the care of patients post-operatively.  The student will be exposed to both emergent and non-emergent surgical management of patients.  The student may be assigned to surgical teams during his/her rotation.  Teaching rounds and lectures are used to introduce concepts of surgical care. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 508	Clinical Residency: Primary Care Elective	3 Units	This clinical rotation is designed to give the student an understanding of family medicine/primary care medicine as practiced in office and/or clinic in an outpatient setting.  The student will work with patients from a variety of social, economic and cultural backgrounds across the lifespan.  They will experience continuity of care while assessing, diagnosing, monitoring, managing, referring and educating patients.    The student will be exposed to both acute and chronic problems as well as the psychosocial problems that are encountered in this setting.  Students may encounter and participate in the care of patients of all ages: pediatric, adolescent, adult and geriatric populations. The formulation and understanding of the many and varied medical problems is accomplished via the accurate collection of data through a complete history and physical exam, interpretation of diagnostic testing, formulation of a problem list, and the development of a plan for each presenting problem. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 509	Clinical Residency: Inpatient Medicine Elective	3 Units	This clinical rotation is designed to provide the student with an understanding of the wide variety of problems encountered in hospital-based internal/surgical medicine. The formulation and understanding of the many and varied medical and or surgical problems is accomplished via the accurate collection of data through a complete history and physical exam, interpretation of diagnostic testing, formulation of a problem list, and the development of a plan for each presenting problems. Students are assigned to medical teams during their rotation.  Teaching rounds and lectures are used to introduce concepts of hospital based medicine. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 510	Clinical Residency: Elective	3 Units	This elective clinical rotation is designed to provide the student with the knowledge and skills in an area of interest.  Students will gain an understanding of the variety of problems encountered in a medical or surgical sub-specialty discipline.  The formulation and understanding of the many and varied medical and/or surgical sub-specialty problems is accomplished via the accurate collection of data through a complete history and physical exam, interpretation of diagnostic testing, formulation of a problem list, and the development of a plan for each presenting problem including pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic management. Acquisition of these skills helps facilitate the PA student to progress through the clinical rotation with increasing complexity of clinical experiences, building confidence, competence and compassion. In addition to gaining clinical skills specific to the specialty of the rotation, the student will also continue to develop skills in systematic medical problem solving and patient management abilities, establish or reinforce patterns of independent learning, self-evaluation, interprofessional relationships and communication skills.  Elective rotation sites are chosen based on practice characteristics that are important for the PA student within this rotation. These may include practice location, patient populations, and availability of specific experiences and procedures. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 511	Clinical Residency: Elective	3 Units	This elective clinical rotation is designed to provide the student with the knowledge and skills in an area of interest.  Students will gain an understanding of the variety of problems encountered in a medical or surgical sub-specialty discipline.  The formulation and understanding of the many and varied medical and/or surgical sub-specialty problems is accomplished via the accurate collection of data through a complete history and physical exam, interpretation of diagnostic testing, formulation of a problem list, and the development of a plan for each presenting problem including pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic management. Acquisition of these skills helps facilitate the PA student to progress through the clinical rotation with increasing complexity of clinical experiences, building confidence, competence and compassion. In addition to gaining clinical skills specific to the specialty of the rotation, the student will also continue to develop skills in systematic medical problem solving and patient management abilities, establish or reinforce patterns of independent learning, self-evaluation, interprofessional relationships and communication skills.  Elective rotation sites are chosen based on practice characteristics that are important for the PA student within this rotation. These may include practice location, patient populations, and availability of specific experiences and procedures. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PAST 600	Capstone Quality Improvement Project & Comprehensive Examination	3 Units	The Quality Improvement (QI) Project (PAST 600 Capstone) is one of two major components of the capstone of the PA program.  This component of the PAST 600 Capstone course provides students with clinical practice opportunities to synthesize practice based improvement knowledge and skills through participation in evaluation of practice based quality improvement projects and quality measures.  The Capstone Quality Improvement evaluation project is conducted over the course of the year.   The Comprehensive Examination (PAST 600) is the summative evaluation and the second of two major components of the capstone of the PA program. The purpose of the exam is to determine whether the student has been able to integrate knowledge and skills obtained from individual courses (didactic and clinical) into unified concepts and demonstrate the acquisition of the competencies needed for entry into clinical practice.  Consisting of a written exam, oral exam and an OSCE, the Comprehensive Examination measures the learner's knowledge, interpersonal skills, patient care skills and professionalism required to enter clinical practice.  It is conducted within the final four months of the program. Prereq: Students must be in Physician Assistant Program.
PHYS 113A	Principles of Physics Laboratory - Mechanics	1 Unit	The laboratory portion of first semester introductory physics.
PHYS 113B	Principles of Physics Laboratory - Electricity and Magnetism	1 Unit	The laboratory portion of the second semester of physics.
PHYS 115	Introductory Physics I	4 Units	First part of a two-semester sequence directed primarily towards students working towards a B.A. in science, with an emphasis on the life sciences. Kinematics; Newton's laws; gravitation; simple harmonic motion; mechanical waves; fluids; ideal gas law; heat and the first and second laws of thermodynamics. This course has a laboratory component. Students may earn credit for only one of the following courses: PHYS 115, PHYS 121, PHYS 123.
PHYS 116	Introductory Physics II	4 Units	Electrostatics, Coulomb's law, Gauss's law; capacitance and resistance; DC circuits; magnetic fields; electromagnetic induction; RC and RL circuits; light; geometrical optics; interference and diffraction; special relativity; introduction to quantum mechanics; elements of atomic, nuclear and particle physics. This course has a laboratory component. Students may earn credit for only one of the following courses: PHYS 116, PHYS 122, PHYS 124. Prereq: PHYS 115.
PHYS 121	General Physics I - Mechanics	4 Units	Particle dynamics, Newton's laws of motion, energy and momentum conservation, rotational motion, and angular momentum conservation. This course has a laboratory component. Recommended preparation: MATH 121 or MATH 123 or MATH 125 or one year of high school calculus. Students who do not have the appropriate background should not enroll in PHYS 121 without first consulting the instructor. Students may earn credit for only one of the following courses: PHYS 115, PHYS 121, PHYS 123.
PHYS 122	General Physics II - Electricity and Magnetism	4 Units	Electricity and magnetism, emphasizing the basic electromagnetic laws of Gauss, Ampere, and Faraday. Maxwell's equations and electromagnetic waves, interference, and diffraction. This course has a laboratory component.  Students may earn credit for only one of the following courses: PHYS 116, PHYS 122, PHYS 124. Prereq: PHYS 121 or PHYS 123. Prereq or Coreq: MATH 122 or MATH 124 or MATH 126.
PHYS 123	Physics and Frontiers I - Mechanics	4 Units	The Newtonian dynamics of a particle and of rigid bodies.  Energy, momentum, and angular momentum conservation with applications.  A selection of special frontier topics as time permits, including fractals and chaos, special relativity, fluid mechanics, cosmology, quantum mechanics.  This course has a laboratory component.  Admission to this course is by invitation only. Students may earn credit for only one of the following courses: PHYS 115, PHYS 121, PHYS 123.
PHYS 124	Physics and Frontiers II - Electricity and Magnetism	4 Units	Time-independent and time-dependent electric and magnetic fields.  The laws of Coulomb, Gauss, Ampere, and Faraday.  Microscopic approach to dielectric and magnetic materials.  Introduction to the usage of vector calculus; Maxwell's equations in integral and differential form.  The role of special relativity in electromagnetism.  Electromagnetic radiation. This course has a laboratory component. Students may earn credit for only one of the following courses: PHYS 116, PHYS 122, PHYS 124. Prereq: PHYS 123 and (MATH 122 or MATH 124).
PHYS 166	Physics Today and Tomorrow	1 Unit	This course will provide students with an opportunity to learn about the most exciting and timely research areas in physics, as well as other topics germane to being a professional physicist. These discussions will cover fields such as nanoscience, ultrafast optics, exotic materials, biophysics, cosmology, string theory and the role of physicists in developing new technologies. Each week a member of the faculty will meet with students to discuss a topic of current interest, how a physicist approaches the problem, and how physicists interact with others to find a solution. Other topics germane to being a professional physicist also will be discussed, including the relationship among academic, industrial, and governmental laboratories; ethics, and non-traditional careers for students trained in physics.
PHYS 203	Analog and Digital Electronics	4 Units	Elements of both analog and digital electronics from the practical viewpoint of the experimental scientist; AC circuits, linear and non-linear operation of op-amps, logic gates, flip-flops, counters, display, memory, transducers, A/D and D/A conversion. Laboratory work involves quantitative investigation of the operation of all these elements, together with projects that explore their combination. Recommended preparation: PHYS 122 or PHYS 124.
PHYS 204	Advanced Instrumentation Laboratory	4 Units	Principles of experimental design; limits of resolution via band-width, thermal noise, background signals; data acquisition and control by computer; computer simulation; signal processing techniques in frequency and time domains, FFT, correlations, and other transform methods; counting techniques. Applications include lock-in amplifiers, digitizing oscilloscopes and data acquisition systems. Prereq: PHYS 203.
PHYS 208	Instrumentation and Signal Analysis Laboratory	4 Units	AC circuit theory, Fourier series, discrete Fourier series. Fourier integral, discrete Fourier integral; analysis in time and frequency domains, correlation, cross-correlation and other transform techniques; computer control of experiments via IEEE488 interface; advanced instrumentation; DMM, arbitrary waveform generator, multiplexing and digitizing oscilloscopes; experimental design, noise; design, construction, and testing of a lock-in amplifier. Prereq: ENGR 210.
PHYS 221	Introduction to Modern Physics	3 Units	Concepts in special relativity, statistical mechanics and quantum mechanics.  Applications to atomic structure, and selected topics in nuclear, condensed matter physics, particle physics, and cosmology. Prereq: PHYS 116 or PHYS 122 or PHYS 124.
PHYS 250	Computational Methods in Physics	3 Units	Numerical methods, data analysis, and error analysis applied to physical problems. Use of personal computers in the solution of practical problems encountered in physics. Interpolation, roots of equations, integration, differential equations, Monte Carlo techniques, propagation of errors, maximum likelihood, convolution, Fourier transforms. Prereq: ENGR 131 or CSDS 132 or ECSE 132. Prereq or Coreq: MATH 224 and PHYS 221.
PHYS 260	Introduction to Climate Change: Physics, Forecasts, and Strategies	3 Units	This is a one-semester introduction to the physical processes that determine Earth's past, present, and future climate. The course focuses on quantitatively understanding the human impact on climate, including the historical development of steadily more sophisticated physical models, and ever more complete data. Particular emphasis will be placed on understanding climate change projections, as well as the ethical, political, economic, and communications challenges associated with various strategies going forward. The course is appropriate for all majors. Offered as EEPS 260 and PHYS 260.
PHYS 261	Our Knowledge of Climate Change: What do we know and how do we know it?	3 Units	Traditional theories of knowledge have concentrated on the actions and beliefs of individuals, and how they marshal evidence from the world to support or refute their scientific hypotheses. This traditional epistemological framework has been challenged by the developments of the modern era of Big Science, resulting in the development of new approaches to a social epistemology of science.  Reflective of how science is done, this epistemological framework in turn can provide guidance for the robust prosecution of the scientific enterprise.  Perhaps nowhere is this more important than in climate science, where on the one hand the underlying dynamics of climate change pose an existential threat to our civilization, and on the other, there are active and well organized efforts to derail the scientific process and to denigrate the scientists. This course will first develop classical notions of the epistemology of science, including the role of models and issues of uncertainty (statistical, systematic, and gross) as well as the challenges of developing a robust scientific process resistant to fraud. These issues will be illustrated by consideration of various classical experiments.  The course will then expand the epistemological framework to the collaborative context of modern big science, illustrating the issues by examples from the field of high energy physics (which saw the development of the World Wide Web by CERN, the European Organization for Nuclear Research, to allow physicists from around the world to share and collectively analyze data).  With this in hand the course will explore the history and current state of climate science in the framework of a social epistemology of big science. Students will develop a good understanding of the role of hierarchical models of climate science, the empirical basis for our current understanding of anthropogenic climate change, the role and development of international coordination of climate science and its implications for policy, and the challenges posed by hostile, well-organized efforts to disrupt the scientific process, the public understanding of the science, and ultimately the processes necessary for addressing the challenges of climate change. Offered as PHIL 261 and PHYS 261.
PHYS 301	Advanced Laboratory Physics I	3 Units	Problem solving approach with a range of available experiments in classical and modern physics. Emphasis on experimental techniques, data and error analysis, and the formal presentation of the work performed. Recommended preparation: PHYS 204. Prereq: Physics or Astronomy Major or Minor. Coreq: PHYS 303.
PHYS 302	Advanced Laboratory Physics II	4 Units	Several projects using research-quality equipment in contemporary fields of experimental physics.  Each requires reading appropriate literature, choosing appropriate instrumentation, performing data acquisition and analysis, and writing a technical paper.  Topics include particle counting techniques, neutron activation, gamma-ray spectroscopy, a range of condensed matter experiments including temperature dependent properties between 10 and 350 K, modern optics, ultrahigh vacuum surface science. Prereq: PHYS 301.
PHYS 303	Advanced Laboratory Physics Seminar	1 Unit	Students will discuss various issues associated with physics research. These include how to judge the quality of an experiment and data (error analysis), how to present your work in written and oral formats, safety and ethical concerns in the laboratory. Recommended preparation: PHYS 250. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
PHYS 310	Classical Mechanics	3 Units	Lagrangian formulation of mechanics and its application to central force motion, scattering theory, rigid body motion, and systems of many degrees of freedom. Recommended preparation: PHYS 221 and either MATH 223 or MATH 227.
PHYS 313	Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics	3 Units	Thermodynamic laws, entropy, and phase transitions from the quantum mechanical viewpoint. Gibbs and Boltzmann factors. Ideal, degenerate fermion, degenerate boson, photon, and phonon gases. Correlation functions and transport phenomena. Applications ranging from solid state physics to astrophysics. Prereq: PHYS 221.
PHYS 314	Innovation and French Science	Past, Present, and Future	3 Units	The French scientific enterprise over the past 250 years has been buffeted by politics, war, civil unrest, and economic and societal changes.  This study abroad course examines the evolution of science in France in light of these influences, how women have play an outsized role relative to the U.S., and the centrality of the French to humanity's scientific endeavor over the centuries. Students will visit many important scientific venues, both historical and modern, around Paris and elsewhere in the country.  Readings from a variety of sources -- scientific, literary, historical -- and informal meetings with French scientists, engineers, and students will provide a comprehensive portrait of French science and scientific history from a variety of perspectives.  The course will be conducted in English, although there is ample opportunity to interact in French if the student desires.  The course meets the CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement and may meet breadth requirements in certain programs.  Not available for credit to students who have completed FRCH 328/428, PHYS 333, WGST 333, or WLIT 353/453. Offered as CHEM 314, HSTY 314, PHYS 314, and WGST 314. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
PHYS 315	Introduction to Solid State Physics	3 Units	Characterization and properties of solids; crystal structure, thermal properties of lattices, quantum statistics, electronic structure of metals and semiconductors.  PHYS 415 for graduate students in engineering and science.  (May not be taken for departmental credit by graduate students in the Department of Physics.)  Prerequisite may be waived with consent of department. Recommended preparation for PHYS 415: PHYS 331. Offered as PHYS 315 and PHYS 415. Prereq: PHYS 331 or PHYS 481.
PHYS 316	Introduction to Nuclear and Particle Physics	3 Units	The physics of nuclei and elementary particles; experimental methods used to determine their properties; models and theories developed to describe their structure. Prereq: PHYS 331 or PHYS 481.
PHYS 317	Engineering Physics Laboratory I	3 Units	Laboratory course for engineering physics majors.  Emphasis is on experimental techniques, data and error analysis, and written and oral presentation of work.  Four experiments drawn from classical and modern physics are carried out.  These emphasize condensed matter, material and optical physics. Experiments include electric fields, resistivity of materials, optical interference, chaotic systems, and spectroscopy. Design of data analysis systems and software is required. Prereq: PHYS 208. Coreq: PHYS 303.
PHYS 318	Engineering Physics Laboratory II	4 Units	Laboratory course for engineering physics majors.  Several projects using research-quality equipment in contemporary fields of experimental physics. Open-ended experiments each require reading appropriate literature, designing the experiment, performing data analysis, and writing a technical paper. Topics are drawn from areas of modern physics, and concentrate on condensed matter, material, and optical physics. Prereq: PHYS 317.
PHYS 320	Introduction to Biological Physics	3 Units	This course explores the intersection of physics and biology:  how do fundamental physical laws constrain life processes inside the cell, shaping biological organization and dynamics?  We will start at the molecular level, introducing the basic ideas of nonequilibrium statistical physics and thermodynamics required to describe the fluctuating environment of the cell.  This allow us to build up a theoretical framework for a variety of elaborate cellular machines:  the molecular motors driving cell movement, the chaperones that assist protein folding, the information-processing circuitry of genetic regulatory networks.  The emphasis throughout will be on simple, quantitative models that can tackle the inherent randomness and variability of cellular phenomena.  We will also examine how to verify these models through the rich toolbox of biophysical experimental and computational technologies.  The course should be accessible to students from diverse backgrounds in the physical and life sciences:  we will explain both the biological details and develop the necessary mathematical / physical ideas in a self-contained manner. Offered as PHYS 320 and PHYS 420. Prereq: (MATH 122 or MATH 124) and (ENGR 131 or CSDS 132 or ECSE 132).
PHYS 321	Advanced Computational Methods in Physics	3 Units	Advanced numerical methods applied to physical problems. Use of personal computers in the solution of practical problems encountered in physics. Topics may include ordinary and partial differential equations, linear algebra, and Monte Carlo techniques. Focus is placed on developing, documenting, testing, and presenting solutions to physical problems.  Standard, collaborative tools commonly used in research groups will be employed. Offered as PHYS 321 and PHYS 421. Prereq: PHYS 250.
PHYS 324	Electricity and Magnetism I	3 Units	First half of a sequence that constitutes a detailed study of the basics of electromagnetic theory and many of its applications.  Electrostatics and magnetostatics of free space, conductors, dielectric and magnetic materials; basic theory illustrated with applications drawn from condensed matter physics, optics, plasma physics, and physical electronics. Prereq: PHYS 116 or PHYS 122 or PHYS 124.
PHYS 325	Electricity and Magnetism II	3 Units	(Continuation of PHYS 324.) Electrodynamics, Maxwell's equations, electromagnetic waves, electromagnetic radiation and its interaction with matter, potential formulation of electromagnetism, and relativity. Prereq: PHYS 324.
PHYS 326	Physical Optics	3 Units	Geometrical optics and ray tracing, wave propagation, interaction of electromagnetic radiation with matter, interference, diffraction, and coherence. Supplementary current topics from modern optics such as nonlinear optics, holography, optical trapping and optical computing. Prerequisite(s) may be waived with consent of department. Offered as PHYS 326 and PHYS 426. Prereq: PHYS 122 or PHYS 124.
PHYS 327	Laser Physics	3 Units	An introduction to theoretical and practical quantum electronics covering topics in quantum optics, laser physics, and nonlinear optics. Topics to be addressed include the physics of two-level quantum systems including the density matrix formalism, rate equations, and semiclassical radiation theory; laser operation including oscillation, gain, resonator optics, transverse and longitudinal modes, Q-switching, mode-locking, and coherence; and nonlinear optics including the nonlinear susceptibility, parametric interactions, stimulated processes, and self-action. Recommended preparation for PHYS 427: PHYS 331 or PHYS 481. Offered as PHYS 327 and PHYS 427. Prereq: PHYS 331 or PHYS 481.
PHYS 328	Cosmology and the Structure of the Universe	3 Units	Distances to galaxies.  The content of the distant universe. Large scale structure and galaxy clusters.  Physical cosmology.  Structure and galaxy formation and evolution.  Testing cosmological models. Offered as ASTR 328, PHYS 328, ASTR 428, and PHYS 428. Prereq: ASTR 222.
PHYS 329	Independent Study	1 - 4 Units	An individual reading course in any topic of mutual interest to the student and the faculty supervisor.
PHYS 330	Experimental Methods in Biophysics	3 Units	There is an extensive array of powerful and elegant tools used to obtain quantitative and qualitative information about the physics of biology. New, cutting-edge techniques are being developed by labs around the world every day. To solve important problems in biophysics, an understanding of the capabilities and limitations of the current instrumental methods is needed. This course will focus on the physical principles of biophysical instrumentation so that appropriate choices and efficient use of measurement tools can be made.  Exposure to instrumentation in core facilities around campus will link lectures to practical demonstrations of the operation of instrumentation. Techniques applied to a diversity of biological macromolecules and assemblies from the molecular level of proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, up to higher organization of cells, cellular organisms and tissues will be discussed. Topics covered include spectroscopic methods (IR/vis/UV/X-ray regions of the electromagnetic spectrum, absorption, fluorescence, circular dichroism, dynamic light scattering, Raman, electron paramagnetic resonance, NMR), microscopy techniques (electron, atomic force, scanning tunneling, optical), separation techniques (sedimentation, centrifugation, chromatography), crystallography, calorimetry, mass spectrometry, single molecule detection, cell sorting, functional genomics and proteomics and laboratory evolution. Biological examples from historical and current literature will be used to demonstrate the merits of each of the methods. Offered as PHYS 330 and PHYS 430. Prereq: PHYS 122 or PHYS 124.
PHYS 331	Introduction to Quantum Mechanics I	3 Units	Quantum nature of energy and angular momentum, wave nature of matter, Schroedinger equation in one and three dimensions; matrix methods; Dirac notation; quantum mechanical scattering. Two particle wave functions. Prereq: PHYS 221.
PHYS 332	Introduction to Quantum Mechanics II	3 Units	Continuation of PHYS 331. Spin and fine structure; Dirac equation; symmetries; approximation methods; atomic and molecular spectra; time dependent perturbations; quantum statistics; applications to electrons in metals and liquid helium. Prereq: PHYS 331.
PHYS 336	Modern Cosmology	3 Units	An introduction to modern cosmology and an exploration of current topics in the field. The first half of the course will cover the mathematical and physical basis of cosmology, while the second will delve into current questions and the observations that constrain them. Offered as PHYS 336 and PHYS 436. Prereq: PHYS 221.
PHYS 339	Seminar	1 - 3 Units	Conducted in small sections with presentation of papers by students and informal discussion.  Special problem seminars and research seminars offered according to interest and need, often in conjunction with one or more research groups.
PHYS 349	Methods of Mathematical Physics I	3 Units	Analysis of complex functions: singularities, residues, contour integration; evaluation and approximation of sums and integrals; exact and approximate solution of ordinary differential equations; transform calculus; Sturm-Liouville theory; calculus of variations. Additional work required for graduate students. Offered as PHYS 349 and PHYS 449. Prereq: (PHYS 121 or PHYS 123) and (MATH 224 or MATH 228).
PHYS 350	Methods of Mathematical Physics II	3 Units	(Continuation of PHYS 349/449.) Special functions, orthogonal polynomials, partial differential equations, linear operators, group theory, tensors, selected specials topics. Additional work required for graduate students. Offered as PHYS 350 and PHYS 450. Prereq: PHYS 349.
PHYS 351	Senior Physics Project	2 Units	A two semester course required for senior BS and BA physics majors. Students pursue a project based on experimental, theoretical or teaching research under the supervision of a physics faculty member, a faculty member from another CWRU department or a research scientist or engineer from another institution. A departmental Senior Project Committee must approve all project proposals and this same committee will receive regular oral and written progress reports.  Final results are presented at the end of the second semester as a paper in a style suitable for publication in a professional journal as well as an oral report in a public symposium. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: PHYS 303. Coreq: PHYS 352.
PHYS 352	Senior Physics Project Seminar	1 Unit	This two semester seminar is taken concurrently with the student's two semester senior project. Students meet weekly to discuss their projects and the research experience. The class will include dialogues about professional issues such as ethics, graduate school, jobs, funding, professional organizations, public obligations, writing and speaking. Assignments include proposals, progress reports and posters. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Coreq: PHYS 351 or PHYS 353.
PHYS 353	Senior Engineering Physics Project	2 Units	A two semester course required for BSE Engineering Physics majors. Students are expected to complete a research project in their concentration area under the supervision of a faculty member in science, engineering, or, with approval, a researcher at another institution or company. The project may be calculational, experimental or theoretical, and will address both the underlying physics and appropriate engineering and design principles. A program Senior Project Committee must approve all project proposals and will receive regular oral and written progress reports. Final results are presented at the end of the second semester as a paper in a style suitable for publication in a professional journal as well as an oral report in a public symposium. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: PHYS 318. Coreq: PHYS 352.
PHYS 365	General Relativity	3 Units	This is an introductory course in general relativity.  The techniques of tensor analysis will be developed and used to describe the effects of gravity and Einstein's theory.  Consequences of the theory as well as its experimental tests will be discussed.  An introduction to cosmology will be given. Additional work required for graduate students. Offered as PHYS 365 and PHYS 465.
PHYS 366	Life after Graduation (Bachelor, Master, and Doctoral)	1 Unit	This course introduces both undergraduate and graduate students to the many career paths that people can take, and have taken, with physics degrees (Bachelor, Master, and Doctoral). The majority of physics graduates, including BS, MS, and PhD, pursue careers outside of academia, and therefore need guidance for non-academic careers. This course is not required for any degree but will provide physics majors and graduate students with opportunities for career exploration, primarily via weekly talks featuring physicists from various industrial and government entities and secondarily through a semester-long set of assignments that centers on creating documents relevant to career paths. Offered as PHYS 366 and PHYS 466.
PHYS 386	Quantum Computing, Information, and Devices	3 Units	An introduction to the math, physics, engineering, and computer science underlying the rapidly emerging fields of quantum computing, quantum information, and quantum devices. The course is taught by a group of faculty from physics, engineering, computer science, and math, and is geared towards students with diverse backgrounds and interests in these fields.  Students will select a concentration in one of these four areas, and the coursework, while still covering all topics, will be adjusted to focus on the selected area in the most detail.  Note that the listed prerequisites depend on choice of concentration.   Topics will include: 1	(Mathematics) Introduction to linear algebra, convex geometry, fundamental theory of quantum information. 2	(Physics) Introduction to the quantum mechanics of two-level systems (qubits). Survey of physics and materials for qubit technologies. 3	(Computer Science) Basic quantum gates and circuits, introduction to the theory of algorithms, survey of quantum algorithms. 4	(Engineering) Quantum architectures, mapping algorithms onto circuits.  The course consists of lectures, homework, and group projects.  Group projects will aim to synthesize the diverse backgrounds of the students and instructors to capture the interdisciplinary nature of the field. Students taking the course for graduate credit will complete an additional literature research project and presentation, in addition to enhanced problem sets. Offered as CSDS 386, CSDS 486, ECSE 386, ECSE 486, MATH 386, MATH 486, PHYS 386, and PHYS 486. Prereq: PHYS 331 and (MATH 223 or MATH 227) and (MATH 224 or MATH 228) and (ENGR 131 or CSDS 132 or ECSE 132) and (PHYS 122 or PHYS 124).
PHYS 390	Undergraduate Research in Physics	0 - 6 Units	Research conducted under the supervision of a faculty member in the Department of Physics.  Arrangements must be made with a faculty member and a written description of these arrangements must be submitted to and approved by the department before a permit will be issued to register for this course. A final report must be supplied to the department at the end of the semester.
PHYS 413	Classical and Statistical Mechanics I	3 Units	An integrated approach to classical and statistical mechanics. Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formulations, conservation laws, kinematics and dynamics, Poisson brackets, continuous media, derivation of laws of thermodynamics, the development of the partition function. To be followed by PHYS 414.
PHYS 414	Classical and Statistical Mechanics II	3 Units	A continuation of PHYS 413. Noninteracting systems, statistical mechanics of solids, liquids, gases, fluctuations, irreversible processes, phase transformations. Recommended preparation: PHYS 413 or consent of department.
PHYS 415	Introduction to Solid State Physics	3 Units	Characterization and properties of solids; crystal structure, thermal properties of lattices, quantum statistics, electronic structure of metals and semiconductors.  PHYS 415 for graduate students in engineering and science.  (May not be taken for departmental credit by graduate students in the Department of Physics.)  Prerequisite may be waived with consent of department. Recommended preparation for PHYS 415: PHYS 331. Offered as PHYS 315 and PHYS 415. Prereq: Graduate standing.
PHYS 420	Introduction to Biological Physics	3 Units	This course explores the intersection of physics and biology:  how do fundamental physical laws constrain life processes inside the cell, shaping biological organization and dynamics?  We will start at the molecular level, introducing the basic ideas of nonequilibrium statistical physics and thermodynamics required to describe the fluctuating environment of the cell.  This allow us to build up a theoretical framework for a variety of elaborate cellular machines:  the molecular motors driving cell movement, the chaperones that assist protein folding, the information-processing circuitry of genetic regulatory networks.  The emphasis throughout will be on simple, quantitative models that can tackle the inherent randomness and variability of cellular phenomena.  We will also examine how to verify these models through the rich toolbox of biophysical experimental and computational technologies.  The course should be accessible to students from diverse backgrounds in the physical and life sciences:  we will explain both the biological details and develop the necessary mathematical / physical ideas in a self-contained manner. Offered as PHYS 320 and PHYS 420. Prereq: Graduate student standing.
PHYS 421	Advanced Computational Methods in Physics	3 Units	Advanced numerical methods applied to physical problems. Use of personal computers in the solution of practical problems encountered in physics. Topics may include ordinary and partial differential equations, linear algebra, and Monte Carlo techniques. Focus is placed on developing, documenting, testing, and presenting solutions to physical problems.  Standard, collaborative tools commonly used in research groups will be employed. Offered as PHYS 321 and PHYS 421.
PHYS 423	Classical Electromagnetism	3 Units	Electromagnetic theory in the classical limit. Gauge invariance and special relativity. Applications to electrostatic, magnetostatic, and radiation problems using advanced mathematical techniques. Dielectric, magnetic, and conducting materials. Wave propagation in open and confined geometries. Radiation from accelerating charges. Cherenkov, synchrotron, and transition radiation.
PHYS 426	Physical Optics	3 Units	Geometrical optics and ray tracing, wave propagation, interaction of electromagnetic radiation with matter, interference, diffraction, and coherence. Supplementary current topics from modern optics such as nonlinear optics, holography, optical trapping and optical computing. Prerequisite(s) may be waived with consent of department. Offered as PHYS 326 and PHYS 426. Prereq: Graduate standing.
PHYS 427	Laser Physics	3 Units	An introduction to theoretical and practical quantum electronics covering topics in quantum optics, laser physics, and nonlinear optics. Topics to be addressed include the physics of two-level quantum systems including the density matrix formalism, rate equations, and semiclassical radiation theory; laser operation including oscillation, gain, resonator optics, transverse and longitudinal modes, Q-switching, mode-locking, and coherence; and nonlinear optics including the nonlinear susceptibility, parametric interactions, stimulated processes, and self-action. Recommended preparation for PHYS 427: PHYS 331 or PHYS 481. Offered as PHYS 327 and PHYS 427. Prereq: Graduate standing.
PHYS 428	Cosmology and the Structure of the Universe	3 Units	Distances to galaxies.  The content of the distant universe. Large scale structure and galaxy clusters.  Physical cosmology.  Structure and galaxy formation and evolution.  Testing cosmological models. Offered as ASTR 328, PHYS 328, ASTR 428, and PHYS 428.
PHYS 430	Experimental Methods in Biophysics	3 Units	There is an extensive array of powerful and elegant tools used to obtain quantitative and qualitative information about the physics of biology. New, cutting-edge techniques are being developed by labs around the world every day. To solve important problems in biophysics, an understanding of the capabilities and limitations of the current instrumental methods is needed. This course will focus on the physical principles of biophysical instrumentation so that appropriate choices and efficient use of measurement tools can be made.  Exposure to instrumentation in core facilities around campus will link lectures to practical demonstrations of the operation of instrumentation. Techniques applied to a diversity of biological macromolecules and assemblies from the molecular level of proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, up to higher organization of cells, cellular organisms and tissues will be discussed. Topics covered include spectroscopic methods (IR/vis/UV/X-ray regions of the electromagnetic spectrum, absorption, fluorescence, circular dichroism, dynamic light scattering, Raman, electron paramagnetic resonance, NMR), microscopy techniques (electron, atomic force, scanning tunneling, optical), separation techniques (sedimentation, centrifugation, chromatography), crystallography, calorimetry, mass spectrometry, single molecule detection, cell sorting, functional genomics and proteomics and laboratory evolution. Biological examples from historical and current literature will be used to demonstrate the merits of each of the methods. Offered as PHYS 330 and PHYS 430.
PHYS 431	Physics of Imaging	3 Units	Description of physical principles underlying the spin behavior in MR and Fourier imaging in multi-dimensions. Introduction of conventional, fast, and chemical-shift imaging techniques. Spin echo, gradient echo, and variable flip-angle methods. Projection reconstruction and sampling theorems. Bloch equations, T1 and T2 relaxation times, rf penetration, diffusion and perfusion. Flow imaging, MR angiography, and functional brain imaging. Sequence and coil design. Prerequisite may be waived with consent of instructor. Recommended preparation: PHYS 122 or PHYS 124 or EBME 410. Offered as EBME 431 and PHYS 431.
PHYS 436	Modern Cosmology	3 Units	An introduction to modern cosmology and an exploration of current topics in the field. The first half of the course will cover the mathematical and physical basis of cosmology, while the second will delve into current questions and the observations that constrain them. Offered as PHYS 336 and PHYS 436. Prereq: Graduate standing.
PHYS 441	Physics of Condensed Matter I	3 Units	Crystal structure, x-ray diffraction, band theory and applications. Free electron theory of metals and electrons in magnetic fields.
PHYS 442	Physics of Condensed Matter II	3 Units	Continuation of PHYS 441. Lattice vibrations, thermal properties of solids, semiconductors, magnetic properties of solids, and superconductivity. Prerequisite may be waived with consent of department. Recommended preparation: PHYS 441.
PHYS 449	Methods of Mathematical Physics I	3 Units	Analysis of complex functions: singularities, residues, contour integration; evaluation and approximation of sums and integrals; exact and approximate solution of ordinary differential equations; transform calculus; Sturm-Liouville theory; calculus of variations. Additional work required for graduate students. Offered as PHYS 349 and PHYS 449. Prereq: Graduate standing.
PHYS 450	Methods of Mathematical Physics II	3 Units	(Continuation of PHYS 349/449.) Special functions, orthogonal polynomials, partial differential equations, linear operators, group theory, tensors, selected specials topics. Additional work required for graduate students. Offered as PHYS 350 and PHYS 450. Prereq: Graduate student standing.
PHYS 451	Empirical Foundations of the Standard Model	3 Units	The experimental basis for modeling the electroweak and strong interactions in terms of fundamental fermions, quarks and leptons, and gauge bosons, photons, the weak bosons, and gluons; particle accelerators and detection techniques; phenomenology of particle reactions, decays and hadronic structure; space, time and internal symmetries; symmetries; symmetry breaking.
PHYS 460	Advanced Topics in NMR Imaging	3 Units	Frontier issues in understanding the practical aspects of NMR imaging.  Theoretical descriptions are accompanied by specific examples of pulse sequences, and basic engineering considerations in MRI system design.  Emphasis is placed on implications and trade-offs in MRI pulse sequence design from real-world versus theoretical perspectives. Recommended preparation: EBME 431 or PHYS 431. Offered as EBME 460 and PHYS 460. Prereq: Graduate standing or Undergraduate with Junior or Senior standing and a cumulative GPA of 3.2 or above.
PHYS 465	General Relativity	3 Units	This is an introductory course in general relativity.  The techniques of tensor analysis will be developed and used to describe the effects of gravity and Einstein's theory.  Consequences of the theory as well as its experimental tests will be discussed.  An introduction to cosmology will be given. Additional work required for graduate students. Offered as PHYS 365 and PHYS 465. Prereq: Graduate standing.
PHYS 466	Life after Graduation (Bachelor, Master, and Doctoral)	1 Unit	This course introduces both undergraduate and graduate students to the many career paths that people can take, and have taken, with physics degrees (Bachelor, Master, and Doctoral). The majority of physics graduates, including BS, MS, and PhD, pursue careers outside of academia, and therefore need guidance for non-academic careers. This course is not required for any degree but will provide physics majors and graduate students with opportunities for career exploration, primarily via weekly talks featuring physicists from various industrial and government entities and secondarily through a semester-long set of assignments that centers on creating documents relevant to career paths. Offered as PHYS 366 and PHYS 466. Prereq: Graduate standing.
PHYS 472	Graduate Physics Laboratory	3 Units	A series of projects designed to introduce the student to modern research techniques such as automated data acquisition. Students will be assessed as to their individual needs and a sequence of projects will be established for each individual. Topics may include low temperature phenomena, nuclear gamma ray detection and measurement and optics. Prereq; Graduate student standing or Undergraduate student with a Mathematics and Physics major.
PHYS 481	Quantum Mechanics I	3 Units	Quantum mechanics with examples of applications. Schroedinger method; matrix and operator methods. Approximation methods including WKB, variational and various perturbation methods. Applications to atomic, molecular and nuclear physics including both bound states and scattering problems. Applications of group theory to quantum mechanics.
PHYS 482	Quantum Mechanics II	3 Units	Continuation of PHYS 481, including quantum field theory. Prerequisite may be waived with consent of department. Recommended preparation: PHYS 481 or consent of department.
PHYS 486	Quantum Computing, Information, and Devices	3 Units	An introduction to the math, physics, engineering, and computer science underlying the rapidly emerging fields of quantum computing, quantum information, and quantum devices. The course is taught by a group of faculty from physics, engineering, computer science, and math, and is geared towards students with diverse backgrounds and interests in these fields.  Students will select a concentration in one of these four areas, and the coursework, while still covering all topics, will be adjusted to focus on the selected area in the most detail.  Note that the listed prerequisites depend on choice of concentration.   Topics will include: 1	(Mathematics) Introduction to linear algebra, convex geometry, fundamental theory of quantum information. 2	(Physics) Introduction to the quantum mechanics of two-level systems (qubits). Survey of physics and materials for qubit technologies. 3	(Computer Science) Basic quantum gates and circuits, introduction to the theory of algorithms, survey of quantum algorithms. 4	(Engineering) Quantum architectures, mapping algorithms onto circuits.  The course consists of lectures, homework, and group projects.  Group projects will aim to synthesize the diverse backgrounds of the students and instructors to capture the interdisciplinary nature of the field. Students taking the course for graduate credit will complete an additional literature research project and presentation, in addition to enhanced problem sets. Offered as CSDS 386, CSDS 486, ECSE 386, ECSE 486, MATH 386, MATH 486, PHYS 386, and PHYS 486. Prereq: PHYS 331 and (MATH 223 or MATH 227) and (MATH 224 or MATH 228) and (ENGR 131 or CSDS 132 or ECSE 132) and (PHYS 122 or PHYS 124).
PHYS 491	Modern Physics for Innovation I	3 Units	The first half of a two-semester sequence providing an understanding of physics as a basis for successfully launching new high-tech ventures.  The course will examine physical limitations to present technologies, and the use of physics to identify potential opportunities for new venture creation.  The course will provide experience in using physics for both identification of incremental improvements, and as the basis for alternative technologies.  Case studies will be used to illustrate recent commercially successful (and unsuccessful) physics-based venture creation, and will illustrate characteristics for success.
PHYS 492	Modern Physics for Innovation II	3 Units	Continuation of PHYS 491, with an emphasis on current and prospective opportunities for Physics Entrepreneurship. Longer term opportunities for Physics Entrepreneurship in emerging areas including, but not limited to, nanoscale physics and nanotechnology; biophysics and applications to biotechnology; physics-based opportunities in the context of information technology. Recommended preparation: PHYS 491.
PHYS 495	Applied Patent Law	1 Unit	This course is designed to equip STEM students with practical knowledge of patent law, the patenting process, intellectual property (IP) strategy and IP management. Specific areas of study include: law and policy of patents, requirements to obtain a patent, the anatomy of the patent document, patent portfolio strategies, preparing and filing a patent application, IP management and monetization, managing IP in a research and development environment, sponsored research and service agreements, trade secrets and their relationship to patents, and non-disclosure agreements.
PHYS 539	Special Topics Seminar	1 - 3 Units	Individual or small group instruction on topics of interest to the department. Topics include, but are not limited to, particle physics, astrophysics, optics, condensed matter physics, biophysics, imaging. Several such courses may run concurrently.
PHYS 591	Gauge Field Theory I	3 Units	Noether's theorem, symmetries and conserved currents, functional integral techniques, quantization, Feynman rules, anomalies, QED, electroweak interactions, QCD, renormalization, renormalization group, asymptotic freedom and assorted other topics. Prereq: PHYS 581.
PHYS 601	Research in Physics	1 - 9 Units	
PHYS 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
PHYS 666	Frontiers in Physics	0 Unit	Weekly colloquia given by eminent physicists from around the world on topics of current interest in physics.
PHYS 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
BAFI 206	Personal Financial Management with Digital Technology	1 Unit	In the digital era, financial technologies have worked its way into our digital wallets and portfolio. Mobile banking services, budgeting and investing apps are inextricably linked with how we conduct our personal finances. While financial literacy deals with underlying finance concepts such as time value of money, compounding, budgeting and investing, financial technologies dictate how we access tools to carry out day-to-day budgeting, investing and consuming. In the digital era, financial technologies, Fintech, serves as an enabler of financial literacy, FinLit. While technology is not a substitute for literacy, Fintech complements literacy. Technology has created a level playing field and has advanced the access to credit and investments.   This course will cover four areas: 1. Comparing banking services and costs 2. Digital banking: Using mobile apps and financial technologies for financial management and decision making 3. Personal finance and digital money 4. Risks in the digital era: Identity protection Offered as BAFI 206 and MGMT 206.
BAFI 210	Seminar: Financial Services Industry	0 - 1 Units	The goal of this course is to prepare students for an alumni-sponsored trip to NYC focused on careers in financial services. Learning goals include: (i) providing career identification, research and preparation skills, with a particular emphasis on financial services, (ii) exposing students to job opportunities in financial services, (iii) allowing students to acquire fundamental business and financial skills, (iv) enabling students to apply skills to actual businesses and real-world cases and projects, (v) building a personal portfolio of experiences to share with prospective employers for each student and (vi) enhancing students' abilities to communicate in a business setting by developing proficiency in PowerPoint and oral presentation skills.
BAFI 335	Introduction to Fintech	3 Units	Fintech refers to financial sector innovations involving technology-enabled business models that can facilitate disintermediation.  These innovations are revolutionizing how existing firms create and deliver products and services, addresses privacy, regulatory and law-enforcement challenges, provides new gateways for entrepreneurship, and seed opportunities for inclusive growth. Fintech is also the label for increasingly technological approaches to the main financial intermediation functions: payments, capital raising, remittances, managing uncertainty and risk, market price discovery, and mediating information asymmetry and incentives. In today's Fintech businesses, consumers bank via mobile apps integrated into social media, institutions trade electronically, and robo-advisers make decisions about investment portfolios.  This course provides an introduction to the emerging Fintech discipline.  The course will cover Fintech innovations, who and how traditional players are being affected and how they must respond, and what business models for new and traditional financial services firms are likely to succeed. Prereq: Sophomore Standing.
BAFI 341	Money and Banking	3 Units	This course emphasizes the importance of financial markets, the nature and role of the financial system, and the linkages between these--money and banking--and the economy.  Emphasis is placed on both theoretical and practical constructs, on major innovations and contemporary changes, and the closely intertwined condition of financial and economic systems with monetary and fiscal policy. Offered as BAFI 341 and ECON 341. Prereq: ECON 102 and ECON 103.
BAFI 355	Corporate Finance	3 Units	The basic goals of this course are to familiarize students with the concepts and tools used in financial management at both the corporate and personal levels. They include the notion of present value, securities valuation, risk and return analysis, and other financial analysis techniques. The concepts and techniques are, in turn, used to evaluate and make decisions regarding the firm's investments (capital budgeting) and the cost of capital. Prereq: At least Sophomore standing and ACCT 100 or ACCT 101.
BAFI 356	Investments	3 Units	This course is about investing in securities. It provides a comprehensive introduction to security analysis and portfolio management. Investing is a rational decision-making process in which the investor seeks to select a package or portfolio of securities that meets a predetermined set of objectives. Descriptive, institutional and quantitative decision-making methods are arranged in a cohesive framework of analysis of interest to the informed investor. Topics include modern portfolio theory, the relation between risk and return, efficient markets, bonds, and options, among others. Prereq: BAFI 355.
BAFI 357	Financial Modeling, Analysis and Decision Making	3 Units	Firms try to create value. In their day-to-day operations, they are faced with numerous challenges: Should we accept trade credit or borrow? Will an acquisition create or destroy value? Should we introduce a new product line even if it cannibalizes an existing one? In each of these situations they try to quantify the impact on the value of their firm. The goal of this course is to develop your skills in financial modeling and valuation, so you can tackle issues like the ones described above. The course is designed to be "hands-on": You will learn to apply the theory and develop spreadsheet modeling skills through homework, case studies and a group project. By the end of the course you will have a good understanding of both the theory and practice of valuation, and possess a set of cutting-edge financial modeling skills. This course is designed for students who aspire to work in a regular company, a bank or a consulting firm in (i) corporate finance (including mergers and acquisitions); (ii) strategy; or (iii) equity and analysis. Prereq: BAFI 355.
BAFI 358	Intermediate Corporate Finance	3 Units	This is a rigorous second course in corporate finance (following BAFI 355) designed to lay the analytic foundation for careers in business.  The objective is to strengthen students' theoretical and conceptual understanding of several important topics in finance, and to develop their problem-solving skills. Topics covered include economic cash flows and valuation, Long term financial planning and ratios analysis, Growth and external financing, Short term financial planning and Working capital management, Managerial options and valuation, Derivatives, Agency cost and asymmetric information, Capital structure and payout policy. Prereq: BAFI 355
BAFI 359	Cases in Finance	3 Units	This course applies the case study method applied to a variety of business situations that teaches students to think on their feet, develop presentation skills and hone business judgment.  The objective of the course is to strengthen students' conceptual understanding  and problem-solving skills. It is intended to complement the two course sequence in corporate finance (BAFI 355 and BAFI 358) by applying these concepts to real world problems. Topics covered include cash flow estimation and corporate valuation, financial planning and ratio analysis, financing using internal and external sources, capital budgeting and managerial options, capital structure, payout policy, financial strategy, public equity analysis (including initial public offerings), mergers and acquisitions and leveraged buyouts.  The course envisages an extensive use of case studies and simulation exercises. Prereq: BAFI 355.
BAFI 360	Independent Study	1 - 18 Units	This course is offered for candidates undertaking reading in a field of special interest. Permission of department chair required.
BAFI 361	Empirical Analysis in Finance	3 Units	This course is developed based on the feedback received from employers who have hired BS Management (finance) graduates in the past and will likely do so in future.  The goal is to enable students to use financial econometrics to effectively analyze financial data.  The course will draw on theoretical aspects of BAFI 355 but focus on developing financial analytic skills. The applied nature of the course comes from the use of real, rather than theoretical, data.  In other words, in a real-world fashion, through the use of statistical methods to analyze real data, the student can address practical questions of high relevance to the Finance industry. The scope of the data as well as the quantitative methods used in such analysis often requires familiarity with computational environments and statistical packages. As such, another goal of the course is to familiarize the student with at least one such environment. Prereq: BAFI 355 and OPRE 207.
BAFI 362	Advanced Financial Analytics	3 Units	The objectives of this course include understanding important quantitative risk models, risk measurement tools and explaining implications for risk management and investment decisions.  Data will be used from Bloomberg and other intra-day data sources to estimate models and evaluate results in many areas of finance. At the end of the course students will:  (i) understand and apply analytical models to real financial market problems, (ii) be exposed to debt, credit, and derivatives markets and associated career opportunities in applied analytics and (iii) be exposed to bank risk management skills and applications. This course is designed to be focused and intense, while also being very aligned with the best practices in the financial industry today. Microsoft Excel, because of its flexibility, will be the primary source of practical experience, though the course may also incorporate other computer tools /languages. Prereq: OPRE 207 and BAFI 355.
BAFI 365	Options and Other Derivatives	3 Units	This course is designed to introduce students to the theoretical and practical aspects of financial futures, options, and other derivatives. The markets for these instruments have grown enormously and have generated a profusion of innovative products and ideas, not to mention periodic crises. Derivatives have become one of the most important tools of modern finance. The goal is for students to understand the principles of how these important instruments and markets work. Prereq: BAFI 355.
BAFI 372	International Finance	3 Units	This course deals with open-economy macroeconomics and international financial markets, covering open-economy national income analysis, international macroeconomic policy coordination, exchange rate determination, foreign portfolio investment, and global financial crises. Offered as BAFI 372 and ECON 372. Prereq: ECON 103.
BAFI 403	Corporate Financial Technology	3 Units	This course is focused on the many aspects of the development in Financial Technology from recent notable successes to the current edge and thoughts about the future.  Topics covered will include "FinTech" Applications, Incubators and Angels, Block Chains, Crypto-currencies, Crowdfunding, and Payment Schemes.  Topics can change from semester to semester, in tune with changing technology.  Offered as BAFI 403 and FNCE 403.
BAFI 404	Financial Modeling	3 Units	This is a course about financial modeling.  It covers a range of topics in the field of financial economics.  Each topic is chosen because it lends itself to  financial modeling.  The primary focus of the course is to relate the theory of finance to practical and usable spreadsheet models that will assist a financial manager with a firm's investment and financing decisions.  Spreadsheet models have been the dominant vehicle for finance professionals to practice their trade.  This course will utilize Excel and challenge the student to improve their finance and modeling skills.  Students will improve their familiarity with financial data analysis through various exercises that incorporate completed models.  In summary, the course is designed to increase your practical understanding of core concepts in finance, help you develop hands-on spreadsheet modeling skills, and strengthen your ability to perform financial data analysis within an Excel model. Prereq: MBAC 504 or MBAP 405.
BAFI 420	Health Finance	3 Units	Exploration of economic, medical, financial and payment factors in the U.S. healthcare system sets the framework for the study of decisions by providers, insurers, and purchasers in this course.  The mix of students from various programs and professions allows wide discussion from multiple viewpoints. Offered as BAFI 420 and HSMC 420. Prereq: MBAC 502 or MBAP 402 or ACCT 401H and enrollment in a program other than MSM in Healthcare.
BAFI 428	Financial Strategy and Value Creation	3 Units	The intersection between the theory of perfect markets and the reality of market imperfections provides the basis for the exploration of value creation in this course.  Opportunities in both product and financial markets are explored using case studies to develop a framework for strategic financial decisions.
BAFI 429	Investment Management	3 Units	This course explores the characteristics of financial investments and markets and develops modern techniques of investment analysis and management. The goal is to help students develop a level of analytical skill and institutional knowledge sufficient to make sensible investment decisions. Topics include: an overview of stock, debt and derivative asset markets, practical applications of modern portfolio theory, equilibrium and arbitrage-based approaches to capital market pricing, the debate over market efficiency, the term structure of interest rates, bond portfolio management, and uses of derivative assets in investment portfolios. Prereq or Coreq: MBAC 504 or MBAP 405.
BAFI 430	Derivatives and Risk Management	3 Units	This course is intended to give students an understanding of options and futures markets both in theory and practice. The emphasis is on arbitrage and hedging. The course concentrates on listed common stock and index contracts as well as commodity markets. Various theories for trading strategies are studied. Prereq or Coreq: MBAC 504 or MBAP 405.
BAFI 431	Fixed Income Markets and Their Derivatives	3 Units	This class is concerned with fixed income securities, interest rate risk management, and credit risk.  Fixed income securities account for about two thirds of the market value of all outstanding securities, and hence this topic is important.  The course covers the basic products of fixed income markets including treasury and LIBOR products, such as interest rate swaps. Risk management and hedging strategies are covered as well as selected topics in credit risk models and mortgage-backed securities. Prereq: BAFI 430.
BAFI 432	Corporate Risk Management	3 Units	This is a risk management course aimed at participants who wish to enhance their understanding of the risks faced by corporate firms, both financial and non-financial, learn techniques to identify and measure these risks, and understand how derivatives and risk management solutions can be used to manage these risks, create value, and advance the strategic goals of the firm.  Offered as BAFI 432 and FNCE 432. Prereq: MBAP 405 or MBAC 504 or MBAC 505.
BAFI 433	Quantitative Risk Modeling	3 Units	This course is designed to help students learn quantitative models for estimating risk in various financial settings for different types of financial institutions (banks, hedge funds, and others). It is a very hands-on course where students will become familiar with several state-of-the-art quantitative risk models as well as their detailed implementation procedure in the real world. The course uses several in-class Excel exercises to illustrate the models as well as their practical implementation using real financial data. Offered as BAFI 433 and FNCE 433. Prereq or Coreq: MBAC 504 or MBAP 405.
BAFI 434	Financial Analytics and Banking	3 Units	This course will cover empirical and analytical aspects of banking, including loan origination, syndication, sales, stress-testing and securitization;  capital adequacy, regulation and supervision; methods of measuring and managing value at risk, credit risk, interest rate risk, liquidity risk, and other risk; credit market information, feedback, and signaling. Offered as BAFI 434 and FNCE 434. Prereq or Coreq: MBAC 504 or MBAP 405.
BAFI 435	Empirical Finance	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to empirical analysis and research in finance.  This involves the management of empirical datasets and the aspects of quantitative applications of finance theory.  The goal is to enable the student to deal with the need to analyze complex and large financial and economic datasets that is present in many fields of the financial profession.  The scope of the data as well as the quantitative methods used in such analysis often requires familiarity with robust computational environments and statistical packages.  As such, another goal of the course is to familiarize the student with at least one such environment.  Applications are conducted using real financial and economic data.  The course draws on the theoretical aspects of the subjects covered, but mainly focuses on the practical matters required to undertake an empirical analysis of financial topics--e.g., the definition of the research question, the datasets required, the computational needs, and, then, the implementation.  The course enables the student to evaluate outstanding financial research as well as to conduct his or her own research. Offered as BAFI 435 and FNCE 435. Prereq or Coreq: MBAC 504 or MBAP 405.
BAFI 444	Entrepreneurial Finance	3 Units	The objective of this course is to introduce students to the issues of financial management and capital formation in new ventures. The course will address issues of estimation of cash requirements, development of pro forma financial plans, firm valuation and the process and tools used in raising debt and equity financing. Bootstrapping, angel investing, venture capital, strategic alliances and initial public offerings will be covered. The emphasis is on the entrepreneur and how he/she can assess financial needs and develop a sensible plan for acquiring financial resources in a manner that is consistent with their financial needs and other strategic goals. Offered as BAFI 444 and FNCE 444. Prereq or Coreq: BAFI 420, MBAC 504, MBAP 405, FNCE/MSFI 401 or MEM students.
BAFI 450	Mergers and Acquisitions	3 Units	This course examines the economic rationale and motivation for the different merger and acquisition and recapitalization activities undertaken by firms and individuals in the U.S. market. Emphasis is on the comparable publicly traded proxy company, comparable "change of control" transaction, and discounted cash flow methods of valuing a firm. The class will also review the different types of debt and equity capital employed to fund mergers and acquisitions and recapitalizations, how senior lenders and equity investors structure their loans and/or investments, and how investors realize the gains through different exit strategies. The legal and tax ramifications of various forms of M&A activity are also discussed. The course gives the student an excellent understanding of the role that senior commercial banks, insurance companies, pension funds, LBO funds, investment banking firms, and venture/growth capital investors play in mergers and acquisitions and will strengthen the students' ability to value a business enterprise. Prereq: MBAC 504 or MBAP 405.
BAFI 460	Investment Strategies	3 Units	This course provides a broad survey of some of the main strategies used by hedge funds today. Through exercises and projects, the hedge fund strategies will be presented using real data. Students will learn to use a methodology referred to as "back testing" in order to evaluate hedge fund strategies. The course will also cover institutional details related to short selling, liquidity, margin requirements, risk management, and performance measurement. Since hedge funds today use advanced modeling techniques, the course will require students to analyze and manipulate real data using mathematical modeling. The objective of the course is for students to gain practical knowledge about creating, back-testing, and implementing hedge fund trading strategies. Offered as BAFI 460 and FNCE 460. Prereq: MBAC 504 and MBAC 505.
BAFI 480	Global Banking & Capital Markets	3 Units	This course will expose students to Banking and Capital Market Structure, Practices, and Regulations in North America, Europe, as well as Asia.  Students will learn about structure of the financial services industry in different parts of the world, the history and evolution of the regulatory frameworks in this industry, and its consequent impact on financial and economic development as well as risk.  Several case studies are used to expose students to different issues and questions that arise in the day-to-day jobs of financial managers in this industry. Offered as BAFI 480 and FNCE 480. Prereq: MBAC 504 or MBAP 405.
BAFI 490	Cases in Applied Corporate and Real Estate Valuation	3 Units	This course is focused on engaging groups of students in identifying, analyzing and making decisions on real-world corporate financial problems.  Teams of students will be assigned to a specific client situation drawn from one of four general areas: (i) mergers and acquisitions (involving corporations and/or leveraged buyout firms),  (ii) public equities (IPOs and/or equity research), (iii) corporate financial policies and transactions or (iv) real estate.  Learning will include lectures, structured problem solving using live case studies and an  in-depth project in which will evaluate an actual current business opportunity and present it to a panel of industry veterans.  In addition to learning deeper financial skills, the course will enhance unstructured problem solving, project management, team building and high level communications skills. Offered as BAFI 490 and FNCE 490. Prereq: MBAC 504 or MBAP 405.
BAFI 491	Python Programming w Appl in Finance	3 Units	There are two parts to this course.  (i	In the first part we learn the basics of Python programming language by solving a sequence of rather simple problems each focusing on broadening your knowledge. At each stage we introduce important commands of Python and slowly learn the structure of object oriented programming with Python. The objective is to make you Python literate.  (ii	The second part of the class is for you to tackle significant financial problems either in risk management or in corporate finance using the Python language as the primary tool to do the analysis. You will develop a series of financial models in your track and then tackle two major projects which will utilize all the skills developed. Offered as BAFI 491 and FNCE 491. Coreq: BAFI 430.
BAFI 501	Special Problems and Topics	.75 - 18 Units	This course is offered, with permission, to students undertaking reading in a field of special interest.
PHOL 351	Independent Study	1 - 6 Units	This course is a guided program of study in physiology textbooks, reviews, and original articles. Guided laboratory projects to reproduce and extend classical physiological experiments are offered to the undergraduate science major.  This course is being offered in conjunction with the Graduate level course PHOL 451. Students are required to consult with the faculty member whose work they have interest in and plan their individual experience.
PHOL 401A	Physiology and Biophysics of Molecules and Cells	2 Units	Physiology and Biophysics of Molecules and Cells is a graduate-level introductory course designed to provide the fundamental principles of modern physiology, protein science  and structural biology, and to prepare students for advanced courses in the biomedical sciences.  The course is divided into 2 blocks that can be taken independently as PHOL 401A or PHOL 401B (2 credit hrs each) during the Spring semester of each year.  The first block will cover the structure and function of proteins and lipids, and the organization of cellular membranes.  Topics will include primary, secondary, tertiary and quarternary protein structure and analysis, enzyme kinetics, allostery and cooperativity, lipid membrane organization and domain structure, and protein-protein and protein-lipid interactions.  The second block will cover molecular pathways and processes critical for cellular homeostasis, function, and signaling.  Topics will include molecular mechanisms of transport across biological membranes and cellular compartments, ionic basis of the resting membrane potential, action potential generation and propagation, osmosis and Gibbs-Donnan equilibria,  regulation of voltage-gated channels and electrogenic transporters, cellular pH regulation, and the biophysics of epithelial transport.  Format will be a combination of lecture, discussion-based problem sets, journal paper presentations, and computer lab exercises and demonstrations.  Grading will be based on performance on two essay-type exams administered in the middle and at the end of each block (80%), and on class participation (20%).
PHOL 401B	Physiology and Biophysics of Molecules and Cells	2 Units	Physiology and Biophysics of Molecules and Cells is a graduate-level introductory course designed to provide the fundamental principles of modern physiology, protein science  and structural biology, and to prepare students for advanced courses in the biomedical sciences.  The course is divided into 2 blocks that can be taken independently as PHOL 401A or PHOL 401B (2 credit hrs each) during the Spring semester of each year.  The first block will cover the structure and function of proteins and lipids, and the organization of cellular membranes.  Topics will include primary, secondary, tertiary and quarternary protein structure and analysis, enzyme kinetics, allostery and cooperativity, lipid membrane organization and domain structure, and protein-protein and protein-lipid interactions.  The second block will cover molecular pathways and processes critical for cellular homeostasis, function, and signaling.  Topics will include molecular mechanisms of transport across biological membranes and cellular compartments, ionic basis of the resting membrane potential, action potential generation and propagation, osmosis and Gibbs-Donnan equilibria,  regulation of voltage-gated channels and electrogenic transporters, cellular pH regulation, and the biophysics of epithelial transport.  Format will be a combination of lecture, discussion-based problem sets, journal paper presentations, and computer lab exercises and demonstrations.  Grading will be based on performance on two essay-type exams administered in the middle and at the end of each block (80%), and on class participation (20%).
PHOL 401C	Human Physiology: A Molecular Understanding of Organ System Function	2 Units	This course is designed to integrate effectively with PHOL 401A and PHOL 401B, bringing the knowledge of the PhD students to the next level of integration and organ function. Structured on a 2 hour lecture per week, the course will cover the main molecular determinant and signaling components (e.g. neurotransmitters, hormones, adipokines, etc.) that regulate the integrated functioning of our main organ systems: respiratory, renal, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, central and autonomic nervous systems, and integrated metabolism. The main topics relative to these 6 blocks will be covered in class through lectures, leaving ample opportunity for the students to engage in an interactive discussion with the instructor or among themselves throughout the lecture and at the end of it. Upon completion of each organ system, the students will elaborate on an assigned research article as part of their home-assignment. The intent of this 2-page essay is to assess the application of the knowledge provided in-class to the research topic discussed in the paper, and further integrate the student's knowledge of the academic material discussed. The course will conclude with a final mini-essay exam. Prereq or Coreq: PHOL 401A and PHOL 401B.
PHOL 402A	Physiological Basis for Disease	3 Units	Physiological Basis for Disease is a graduate-level course designed to provide the fundamental physiology of a select group of organ systems and examples of how the molecular basis of disease affects physiological function of these systems. As such, PHOL402 will prepare  students for future study in advanced biomedical sciences. The course is 3 credit hours and will be offered in the both the Fall  (402A) and Spring (402B) semesters of each academic year. Course content of PHOL402 builds on knowledge learned in Medical Physiology-- PHOL481 and PHOL482, and is designed to be taken concurrently or in series with Medical Physiology courses. Topics to be covered during the Fall (402A)  semester include pathophysiology of cancer, and select diseases of the central nervous system,  cardiovascular system, and urinary/renal system. Topics to be covered in the Spring (402B) semester include select diseases of the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and endocrine systems. The format will be a combination of lectures, in class discussions, and take-home problem sets to facilitate student-directed learning. Grading will be based on problem sets (30%) and weekly quizzes (70%). Due to the course format and large class size, this course is intended primarily for master's students.  PhD students that desire to take this course must first seek approval from their graduate program directors.
PHOL 402B	Physiological Basis for Disease	3 Units	Physiological Basis for Disease is a graduate-level course designed to provide the fundamental physiology of a select group of organ systems and examples of how the molecular basis of disease affects physiological function of these systems. As such, PHOL402 will prepare  students for future study in advanced biomedical sciences. The course is 3 credit hours and will be offered in the both the Fall  (402A) and Spring (402B) semesters of each academic year. Course content of PHOL402 builds on knowledge learned in Medical Physiology-- PHOL481 and PHOL482, and is designed to be taken concurrently or in series with Medical Physiology courses. Topics to be covered during the Fall (402A)  semester include pathophysiology of cancer, and select diseases of the central nervous system,  cardiovascular system, and urinary/renal system. Topics to be covered in the Spring (402B) semester include select diseases of the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and endocrine systems. The format will be a combination of lectures, in class discussions, and take-home problem sets to facilitate student-directed learning. Grading will be based on problem sets (30%) and weekly quizzes (70%). Due to the course format and large class size, this course is intended primarily for master's students.  PhD students that desire to take this course must first seek approval from their graduate program directors.
PHOL 410	Basic Oxygen & Physiological Function	3 Units	On-line lecture only course which explores the significance and consequences of oxygen and oxygen metabolism in living organisms.  Topics to be covered include transport by blood tissues, oxygen toxicity, and mitochondrial metabolism.  Emphasis will be placed on mammalian physiology with special reference to brain oxidative metabolism and blood flow as well as whole body energy expenditure and oxidative stress related to disease.  The course will cover additional spans of physiology, nutrition and anatomy. Offered as NTRN 410 and PHOL 410.
PHOL 419	Applied Probability and Stochastic Processes for Biology	3 Units	Applications of probability and stochastic processes to biological systems. Mathematical topics will include: introduction to discrete and continuous probability spaces (including numerical generation of pseudo random samples from specified probability distributions), Markov processes in discrete and continuous time with discrete and continuous sample spaces, point processes including homogeneous and inhomogeneous Poisson processes and Markov chains on graphs, and diffusion processes including Brownian motion and the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process.  Biological topics will be determined by the interests of the students and the instructor.  Likely topics include: stochastic ion channels, molecular motors and stochastic ratchets, actin and tubulin polymerization, random walk models for neural spike trains, bacterial chemotaxis, signaling and genetic regulatory networks, and stochastic predator-prey dynamics.  The emphasis will be on practical simulation and analysis of stochastic phenomena in biological systems.  Numerical methods will be developed using a combination of MATLAB, the R statistical package, MCell, and/or URDME, at the discretion of the instructor.  Student projects will comprise a major part of the course. Offered as BIOL 319, ECSE 319, MATH 319, SYBB 319, BIOL 419, EBME 419, MATH 419, PHOL 419, and SYBB 419.
PHOL 430	Advanced Methods in Structural Biology	1 - 6 Units	The course is designed for graduate students who will be focusing on one or more methods of structural biology in their thesis project.  This course is divided into 3-6 sections (depending on demand).  The topics offered will include X-ray crystallography, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, optical spectroscopy, mass spectrometry, cryo-electron microscopy, and computational and design methods.  Students can select one or more modules.  Modules will be scheduled so that students can take all the offered modules in one semester.  Each section is given in 5 weeks and is worth 1 credit.  Each section covers one area of structural biology at an advanced level such that the student is prepared for graduate level research in that topic.
PHOL 451	Independent Study	1 - 18 Units	Guided program of study using physiology textbooks, research reviews, and original research articles. An independent laboratory research project may also be included.
PHOL 466	Cell Signaling	3 Units	This is an advanced problem set and research paper-based discussion format course that covers cell signaling mechanisms; there are no lectures.  Included are discussions of neurotransmitter-gated ion channels, growth factor receptor kinases, cytokine receptors, G protein-coupled receptors, steroid receptors, heterotrimeric G proteins, ras family GTPases, second messenger cascades, protein kinase cascades, second messenger regulation of transcription factors, signals for regulation of cell growth, division, tissue development and cell death. Offered as CLBY 466, NEUR 466, PHOL 466 and PHRM 466.
PHOL 467	Topics in Evolutionary Biology	3 Units	The focus for this course on a special topic of interest in evolutionary biology will vary from one offering to the next. Examples of possible topics include theories of speciation, the evolution of language, the evolution of sex, evolution and biodiversity, molecular evolution. ANAT/ANTH/EEPS/PHIL/PHOL 467/BIOL 468 will require a longer, more sophisticated term paper, and additional class presentation. Offered as ANTH 367, BIOL 368, EEPS 367, PHIL 367, ANAT 467, ANTH 467, BIOL 468, EEPS 467, PHIL 467 and PHOL 467.
PHOL 475	Protein Biophysics	3 Units	This course focuses on in-depth understanding of the molecular biophysics of proteins. Structural, thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of protein function and structure-function relationships will be considered at the advanced conceptual level. The application of these theoretical frameworks will be illustrated with examples from the literature and integration of biophysical knowledge with description at the cellular and systems level. The format consists of lectures, problem sets, and student presentations. A special emphasis will be placed on discussion of original publications.  Offered as BIOC 475, CHEM 475, PHOL 475, PHRM 475, and NEUR 475.
PHOL 477	Human Physiology	4 Units	This lecture/seminar experience is meant to enhance the student's fundamental knowledge in human physiology with an emphasis on physiologic concepts in relationship to health, disease and illnesses.  The course will provide students with an understanding of the function, regulation and integration of the major organ systems.
PHOL 479	Clinical Reasoning: Applied Medical Physiology	3 Units	Physicians, detectives, scientists and mechanics all use deductive reasoning with multiple hypotheses to solve problems.  The primary objective of this course is to help students apply their knowledge of medical physiology to solving clinical problems. The second objective is to develop an overall view of the clinical reasoning process as a problem-solving method.  This will be done primarily through problem-based case studies of patients with cardiovascular, pulmonary and renal disease.  Case studies will be supplemented by video presentations of patient history and physical exam, and student-led presentations. Prereq: PHOL 482 and PHOL 484.
PHOL 480	Physiology of Organ Systems	4 Units	Our intent is to expand the course from the current 3 hours per week (1.5 hour on Monday and Wednesday) to 4 hours per week (1.5 hours on Monday and Wednesday plus 1 hour on Friday).  Muscle structure and Function, Myasthenia gravis and Sarcopenia; Central Nervous System, (Synaptic Transmission, Sensory System, Autonomic Nervous System, CNS circuits, Motor System, Neurodegenerative Diseases, Paraplegia and Nerve Compression); Cardiovascular Physiology (Regulation of Pressure and flow; Circulation, Cardiac Cycle, Electrophysiology, Cardiac Function, Control of Cardiovascular function, Hypertension); Hemorragy, Cardiac Hypertrophy and Fibrillation; Respiration Physiology (Gas Transport and Exchange, Control of Breathing, Acid/base regulation, Cor Pulmonaris and Cystic Fibrosis, Sleeping apnea and Emphysema); Renal Physiology (Glomerular Filtration, Tubular Function/transport, Glomerulonephritis, Tubulopaties); Gastro-Intestinal Physiology (Gastric motility, gastric function, pancreas and bile function, digestion and absorption, Liver Physiology; Pancreatitis, Liver Disease and cirrhosis); Endocrine Physiology (Thyroid, Adrenal glands, endocrine pancreas, Parathyroid, calcium sensing receptor, Cushing and diabetes, Reproductive hormones, eclampsia); Integrative Physiology (Response to exercise, fasting and feeding, aging).  For all the classes, the students will receive a series of learning objectives by the instructor to help the students address and focus their attention to the key aspects of the organ physiology (and physiopathology).  The evaluation of the students will continue to be based upon the students' participation in class (60% of the grade) complemented by a mid-term and a final exam (each one accounting for 20% of the final grade). Offered as BIOL 480 and PHOL 480.
PHOL 481	Medical Physiology I	6 Units	Physiology is the dynamic study of life.  It describes the vital functions of living organisms and their organs, cells, and molecules.  For some, physiology is the function of the whole person.  For many practicing clinicians, physiology is the function of an individual organ system.  For others, physiology may focus on the cellular principles that are common to the function of all organs and tissues.  Medical physiology deals with how the human body functions, which depends on how the individual organ systems function, which depends on how the component cells function, which in turn depends on the interactions among subcellular organelles and countless molecules.  Thus, it requires an integrated understanding of events at the level of molecules, cells, and organs.  Medical Physiology I is a lecture course (3, 2 hr. lectures/week).  It is the first of a two-part, comprehensive survey of physiology that is divided into four blocks: Block 1 covers the physiology of cells and molecules, signal transduction, basic electrophysiology, and muscle physiology; Block 2 covers the nervous system; Block 3 covers the cardiovascular system, and; Block 4 covers the respiratory system.  Grading in the course will be based on performance on multiple choice/short essay examinations administered at the end of each block with each examination weighted according to the number of lectures contained in that block.
PHOL 482	Medical Physiology II	6 Units	Physiology is the dynamic study of life.  It describes the vital functions of living organisms and their organs, cells, and molecules.  For some, physiology is the function of the whole person.  For many practicing clinicians, physiology is the function of an individual organ system.  For others, physiology may focus on the cellular principles that are common to the function of all organs and tissues.  Medical physiology deals with how the human body functions, which depends on how the individual organ systems function, which depends on how the component cells function, which in turn depends on the interactions among subcellular organelles and countless molecules.  Thus, it requires an integrated understanding of events at the level of molecules, cells, and organs.  Medical Physiology II is a lecture course (3, 2hr. lectures/week).  It is the second of a two-part, comprehensive survey of physiology that is divided into five blocks:  Block 5 covers the physiology of the urinary system; Block 6 covers the gastrointestinal system; Block 7 covers the endocrine system; Block 8 covers reproduction; and Block 9 covers the physiology of everyday life.  Grading in the course will be based on performance on multiple choice/short essay examinations administered at the end of each block with each examination weighted according to the number of lectures contained in that block
PHOL 483	Translational Physiology I	3 Units	Physiology is the dynamic study of life, describing the vital functions of living organisms and their organs, cells, and molecules. For some clinicians, physiology is the function of an individual organ system. For others, it focuses on the cellular principles that are common to the function of all organs and tissues. Medical physiology deals with how the human body functions, which depends on individual organ systems function, which depends on cellular function, which in turn depends on molecular interactions. Translational Physiology I will explore examples of how the latest basic research in physiology and biophysics is being applied to the treatment of human disease. For example, while the students are studying the basic principles of cardiovascular physiology, they will also be investigating how these principles are being applied to treat/cure human cardiovascular disorders such as congestive heart failure, coronary artery disease, etc. Translational Physiology I is a lecture course (1, 2hr lecture/week, and 1, 1hr lecture/week) taught by clinical and basic science faculty. The 2 hour lecture will be given primarily by clinical faculty and is focused on applying physiological principles to clinical cases of pathophysiology. The 1 hour lecture will be given primarily by basic science faculty and will expose students to the process of translating fundamental basic science research to the clinic, that is bench-to-bedside. It is the first of a two-part course that follows the topics being simultaneously covered in the Medical Physiology I course. It is divided into 4 blocks:  Block 1 covers the physiology of cells and molecules, signal transduction, basic electrophysiology, and muscle physiology; Block 2 covers the nervous system; Block 3 covers the cardiovascular system, and; Block 4 covers the respiratory system. Grading in the course will be based on performance on multiple choice examinations administered at the end of each block with each examination weighted according to the number of lectures contained in the block.
PHOL 484	Translational Physiology II	3 Units	Physiology is the dynamic study of life, describing the vital functions of living organisms and their organs, cells, and molecules. For some clinicians, physiology is the function of an individual organ system. For others, it focuses on the cellular principles that are common to the function of all organs and tissues. Medical physiology deals with how the human body functions, which depends on how the individual organ systems function, which depends on how the component cells function, which in turn depends on the interactions among subcellular organelles and countless molecules. Translational Physiology II will explore examples of how the latest basic research in physiology and biophysics is being applied to the treatment of human disease. For example, while the students are studying the basic physiology of the urinary system, they will also be investigating how these principles are being applied to treat/cure human kidney disorders such as renal failure, high blood pressure, glomerular disease, etc.. Translational Physiology II is a lecture course (1, 2hr lecture/week, and 1, 1hr lecture/week) taught by clinical and basic science faculty. The 2 hour lecture will be given primarily by clinical faculty and is focused on applying physiological principles to clinical cases of pathophysiology. The 1 hour lecture will be given primarily by basic science faculty and will expose students to the process of translating fundamental basic science research to the clinic, that is bench-to-bedside. It is the second of a two-part course that follows topics being simultaneously covered in the Medical Physiology II course. It is divided into 4 blocks: Block 5 covers the physiology of the urinary system; Block 6 covers the gastrointestinal system and metabolism; Block 7 covers the endocrine system and reproduction, and, Block 8 covers the physiology of everyday life. Grading in the course will be based on performance on multiple choice examinations administered at the end of each block with each examination weighted according to the number of lectures contained in the block. Coreq: PHOL 482.
PHOL 485	Comparative and Evolutionary Physiology	3 Units	This course presents physiological concepts from the comparative and evolutionary perspective. Aspects of vertebrate and mammalian evolution will be considered with respect to the generation of adaptive advantages for organisms to changing environmental challenges since the Cambrian. Comparative physiological concepts include scaling, variations in nutrition, energy metabolism and work efficiency.  The important influences of time, temperature, water and energy on mammalian biology will be presented.   The course is a lecture based course that can be taken in person or on-line. Evaluations will be by regular quizzes, a mid-term and a final exam, all MCQ.  Offered as PHOL 485 and ORIG 485.
PHOL 487	Exercise Physiology for Health and Disease	3 Units	Lifestyle Medicine is a graduate level course designed to provide an understanding of the fundamentals of the physiological and biochemical principles of exercise physiology and the application of these principles in health and disease. As such, this course will prepare students for future study in advanced biomedical sciences. The course is three credit hours and will be offered in the both the Fall and Summer semesters of each academic year. Course content builds on knowledge learned in Medical Physiology and is designed to be taken concurrently or in series with Medical Physiology courses. Topics to be covered include physiology of exercise, metabolism, and the application of exercise to select diseases of the musculoskeletal, gastrointestinal, neurological, and cardiovascular systems.
PHOL 492	Clinical Reasoning II	3 Units	The objective of this course is to help students use principles of medical physiology to solve clinical problems.  The second objective is to develop an overall view of clinical reasoning and improve critical thinking skills.  The topics in Clinical Reasoning II are neurology, gastroenterology and endocrine/metabolic diseases. PHOL 479 Clinical Reasoning I, which covers cardiovascular, pulmonary and renal diseases, is not required. I anticipate that you will learn to: 	Recognize physiologic mechanisms underlying abnormal physical findings, laboratory tests and imaging. 	Use signs, symptoms, physical findings, laboratory tests and imaging to generate patient problem lists. 	Develop and refine diagnostic hypotheses, i.e., differential diagnosis. 	Understand the physiological basis of appropriate treatment plans. Prereq: PHOL 481.
PHOL 493	Clinical Reasoning III	3 Units	This course is a graduate-level course designed to provide an understanding of the fundamentals of the physiology, pathophysiology, and pathologies that most commonly affect the human endocrine glands (Block 1 of the course), and blood cells (Block 2 of the course). The course is designed along the lines of the already established Clinical Reasoning I and Clinical Reasoning II offered by the same instructor in the Fall semester and the Spring semester, respectively. The clinical topics covered in Clinical Reasoning III are different from and complementary to those presented in the other two Clinical Reasoning courses. Clinical Reasoning I covers the Cardiac, Respiratory, and Renal systems. Clinical Reasoning II covers the Neurology, Gastro-Intestinal, and Oncology systems.
PHOL 497A	Neurology Grand Rounds	1 Unit	This course is a weekly seminar series offered summer, fall, and spring semesters by the Department of Neurology at University Hospitals Case Medical Center.  To earn a Passing grade in this course, students must attend at least 75% of the grand rounds offered by the Department of Neurology during the semester (signing in at the session) and submit to the course director within the week following the Grand Rounds, a one page report containing:  1) the name of the presenter and their professional affiliation; 2) the title of the presentation; 3) time and place of the Grand Rounds; 4) a one paragraph synopsis of the content of the presentation.  Recommended Preparation: Pass the NBME Subject Exam in Physiology and Neurophysiology. Prereq: PHOL 481, PHOL 482, PHOL 483, PHOL 484, PHOL 498A and PHOL 498B.
PHOL 497B	Neurology Grand Rounds	1 Unit	This course is a weekly seminar series offered summer, fall, and spring semesters by the Department of Neurology at University Hospitals Case Medical Center.  To earn a Passing grade in this course, students must attend at least 75% of the grand rounds offered by the Department of Neurology during the semester (signing in at the session) and submit to the course director within the week following the Grand Rounds, a one page report containing:  1) the name of the presenter and their professional affiliation; 2) the title of the presentation; 3) time and place of the Grand Rounds; 4) a one paragraph synopsis of the content of the presentation. Recommended Preparation: Pass the NBME Subject Exam in Physiology and Neurophysiology. Prereq: PHOL 481, PHOL 482, PHOL 483, PHOL 484, PHOL 497A, PHOL 498A and PHOL 498B.
PHOL 497C	Clinical Nephrology Conference	1 Unit	Clinical Nephrology Conference (CNC) at MetroHealth Medical Center, Dept. Medicine, Division of Nephrology. This course must be taken at least once and can be taken up to 2 times for a total of 2 credit hours.  For the 15-week semester, students are responsible for attending and reporting on 12 of the scheduled CNC.  For each CNC, the student must submit to the course director (Dr. Liedtke) within the week following the CNC, a one page report stating: a	The name of the presenter and their professional affiliation b	The title of the presentation c	Time and place of the CNC d	A one paragraph synopsis of the presentation The course director is responsible for assigning the grades for this course. Prior or concurrent CITI training must be completed. Prereq: PHOL 481, PHOL 482, PHOL 483, PHOL 484, PHOL 498A and PHOL 498B.
PHOL 497D	Clinical Nephrology Conference	1 Unit	Clinical Nephrology Conference (CNC) at MetroHealth Medical Center, Dept. Medicine, Division of Nephrology. This course must be taken at least once and can be taken up to 2 times for a total of 2 credit hours.  For the 15-week semester, students are responsible for attending and reporting on 12 of the scheduled CNC.  For each CNC, the student must submit to the course director (Dr. Liedtke) within the week following the CNC, a one page report stating: a	The name of the presenter and their professional affiliation b	The title of the presentation c	Time and place of the CNC d	A one paragraph synopsis of the presentation The course director is responsible for assigning the grades for this course. Prior or concurrent CITI training must be completed. Prereq: PHOL 481, PHOL 482, PHOL 483, PHOL 484, PHOL 498A and PHOL 498B.
PHOL 497E	Pulmonary Grand Rounds	1 Unit	Students are responsible for attending 10 of 15 sessions for that semester.  Pulmonary Science Grand Rounds (adult pulmonology) and Pediatric Basic Science Seminar Series are convened Friday mornings at UH Case Medical Center at  8:00 am and 9:00 am, respectively.  For each session attended, the student must submit to the course director (Dr. Liedtke) within the week following the session, a one page report stating: a. name of the presenter and their professional affiliation, b. title of the presentation, c. time and place of the session, and d. one paragraph synopsis of the presentation.  The course director is responsible for assigning the grades for this course. Prereq: PHOL 481, PHOL 482, PHOL 483, PHOL 484, PHOL 498A, and PHOL 498B.
PHOL 497F	Pulmonary Grand Rounds	1 Unit	This course must be taken once and can be taken up to 2 times for a total of 2 credit hours.  Students are responsible for attending 10 of 15 sessions for that semester.  Pulmonary Science Grand Rounds (adult pulmonology) and Pediatric Basic Science Seminar Series are convened Friday mornings at UH Case Medical Center at  8:00 am and 9:00 am, respectively.  For each session attended, the student must submit to the course director (Dr. Liedtke) within the week following the session, a one page report stating: a. name of the presenter and their professional affiliation, b. title of the presentation, c. time and place of the session, and d. one paragraph synopsis of the presentation.  The course director is responsible for assigning the grades for this course. Prereq: PHOL 481, PHOL 482, PHOL 483, PHOL 484, PHOL 498A, and PHOL 498B.
PHOL 498A	Physiology and Biophysics Departmental Seminar	1 Unit	Weekly one-hour reviews by invited speakers of their research. Students present literature reviews or summaries of their research.
PHOL 498B	Physiology Seminar B (Spring Semester)	1 Unit	Weekly one-hour reviews by invited speakers of their research.  Offered spring semester.
PHOL 498C	Physiology and Biophysics Department Seminar for Medical Physiology Students	1 Unit	Weekly one-hour research reviews offered by various speakers, upon invitation. Students will present literature reviews or summaries of their own research throughout the course. Grades will be determined by quizzes based on the research presented.
PHOL 498D	Physiology MSMP Seminar B (Spring Semester)	1 Unit	Weekly one-hour research reviews offered by various speakers, upon invitation. Students will present literature reviews or summaries of their own research throughout the course. Grades will be determined by quizzes based on the research presented. Offered spring semester.
PHOL 505	Laboratory Research Rotation	1 Unit	Six week experience in a selected faculty research laboratory designed to introduce the student to all aspects of modern laboratory research including the design, execution and analysis of original experimental work. Recommended preparation: Consent of instructor and scheduled laboratory.
PHOL 514	Cardiovascular Physiology	3 Units	The goal of this course is to provide the student with a solid foundation in cardiovascular physiology and pathophysiology. The course will begin by providing a solid foundation in the structure, phenotype and function of cardiac and vascular muscle. In addition, electrophysiology and metabolism will be addressed. Both basic physiology and more advanced topics, such as pathophysiology, will be covered using a journal club format. (Twice weekly; 1.5hrs/class.) Student participation is required.
PHOL 519	Cardio-Respiratory Physiology	3 Units	This course is designed to integrate systemic, cellular and molecular aspects of cardio-respiratory systems in physiological and pathophysiological states. The course requires prior knowledge of basic physiology of the cardiovascular systems. Extensive student participation is required. Instructors provide a brief overview of the topic followed by presentation and critical appraisal of recent scientific literature by students.
PHOL 528	Contemporary Approaches to Drug Discovery	3 Units	This course is designed to teach the students how lead compounds are discovered, optimized, and processed through clinical trials for FDA approval.  Topics will include: medicinal chemistry, parallel synthesis, drug delivery and devices, drug administration and pharmacokinetics, and clinical trials.  A special emphasis will be placed on describing how structural biology is used for in silico screening and lead optimization.  This component will include hands-on experience in using sophisticated drug discovery software to conduct in silico screening and the development of drug libraries.  Each student will conduct a course project involving in silico screening and lead optimization against known drug targets, followed by the drafting of an inventory disclosure.  Another important aspect of this course will be inclusion of guest lectures by industrial leaders who describe examples of success stories of drug development. Offered as BIOC 528, PHOL 528, PHRM 528, and SYBB 528.
PHOL 601	Research	1 - 18 Units	Cellular physiology laboratory research activities that are based on faculty and student interests.
PHOL 610	Oxygen and Physiological Function	1 Unit	Lecture/discussion course which explores the significance and consequences of oxygen and oxygen metabolism in living organisms. Topics to be covered include oxygen transport by blood tissues, oxygen toxicity, and mitochondrial metabolism. Emphasis will be placed on mammalian physiology with special reference to brain oxidative metabolism and blood flow as well as whole body energy expenditure and oxidative stress related to disease.  The course will cover additional spans of physiology, nutrition and anatomy. Offered as ANAT 610, NTRN 610, and PHOL 610.
PHOL 614	Sleep Physiology - Neurobiology of Sleep/Wake	3 Units	Participants in this course will gain an understanding of the neural mechanisms contributing to the states of sleep and wakefulness. Contemporary theories regarding why humans need to sleep will be reviewed. We will also review how perturbations within specific neurotransmitter systems become manifest as sleep related disorders and the pharmacological interventions used to normalize activity within those neural pathways. Prereq: PHOL 481 and PHOL 482 or requisites not met permission.
PHOL 620A	Clinical Observer: Neurology Service	2 Units	This course is a 2 week intensive experience offered summer, fall, and spring semesters on a schedule set by the Department of Neurology at University Hospitals Case Medical Center.  Students are expected to be present and observe at all of the times set forth by the house staff and attending, generally a 40 hour week minimum. The Objective of the course is to provide the students with the experience of observing patient care provided by 3rd year medical students on a clinical rotation under direct supervision by house staff and attending on an active acute Neurology Service. The PGY-2 Neurology Resident and PGY-3 Chief Resident will always be available for immediate supervision.  Students round as Clinical Observers with the CWRU medical students according to their daily schedule. They will learn the basics of neurological history-taking, neurological examination, neurodiagnostic studies, and neurological therapeutics. Didactic sessions covering a wide range of neurologic and neurosurgical topics are covered by faculty members from both departments. The lectures cover the gamut of neurological and neurosurgical disease processes and treatments. Neurosurgery lectures include such topics as cerebrovascular disease, brain tumors, hydrocephalus, spinal disorders, and head trauma as well as doctor-patient communication. Unlike the medical students on the rotation, a Clinical Observer will only observe procedures and will not actively take part in any health care; he/she will act strictly as an observer, but will act as a physiological consultant to the team responsible for providing basic science input to the clinical cases. Prereq: PHOL 481, PHOL 482, PHOL 483, PHOL 484, PHOL 498A and PHOL 498B.
PHOL 620B	Clinical Observer: Stroke Service	2 Units	This course is a 2 week intensive experience offered summer, fall, and spring semesters on a schedule set by the Department of Neurology at University Hospitals Case Medical Center.  Students are expected to be present and observe at all of the times set forth by the house staff and attending, generally a 40 hour week minimum. The Objective of the course is to provide the students with the experience of observing patient care provided by 3rd year medical students on a clinical rotation under direct supervision by house staff and attending on an active acute Neurology Service. The PGY-2 Neurology Resident and PGY-3 Chief Resident will always be available for immediate supervision.  Students round as Clinical Observers with the CWRU medical students according to their daily schedule. They will learn the basics of neurological history-taking, neurological examination, neurodiagnostic studies, and neurological therapeutics. Didactic sessions covering a wide range of neurologic and neurosurgical topics are covered by faculty members from both departments. The lectures cover the gamut of neurological and neurosurgical disease processes and treatments. Neurosurgery lectures include such topics as cerebrovascular disease, brain tumors, hydrocephalus, spinal disorders, and head trauma as well as doctor-patient communication. Unlike the medical students on the rotation, a Clinical Observer will only observe procedures and will not actively take part in any health care; he/she will act strictly as an observer, but will act as a physiological consultant to the team responsible for providing basic science input to the clinical cases. Prereq: PHOL 481, PHOL 482, PHOL 483, PHOL 484, PHOL 498A and PHOL 498B.
PHOL 620C	Clinical Observer: Epilepsy Service	2 Units	This course is a 2 week intensive experience offered summer, fall, and spring semesters on a schedule set by the Department of Neurology at University Hospitals Case Medical Center.  Students are expected to be present and observe at all of the times set forth by the house staff and attending, generally a 40 hour week minimum. The Objective of the course is to provide the students with the experience of observing patient care provided by 3rd year medical students on a clinical rotation under direct supervision by house staff and attending on an active acute Neurology Service. The PGY-2 Neurology Resident and PGY-3 Chief Resident will always be available for immediate supervision.  Students round as Clinical Observers with the CWRU medical students according to their daily schedule. They will learn the basics of neurological history-taking, neurological examination, neurodiagnostic studies, and neurological therapeutics. Didactic sessions covering a wide range of neurologic and neurosurgical topics are covered by faculty members from both departments. The lectures cover the gamut of neurological and neurosurgical disease processes and treatments. Neurosurgery lectures include such topics as cerebrovascular disease, brain tumors, hydrocephalus, spinal disorders, and head trauma as well as doctor-patient communication. Unlike the medical students on the rotation, a Clinical Observer will only observe procedures and will not actively take part in any health care - he/she will act strictly as an observer, but will act as a physiological consultant to the team responsible for providing basic science input to the clinical cases. Prereq: PHOL 481, PHOL 482, PHOL 483, PHOL 484, PHOL 498A and PHOL 498B.
PHOL 620D	Clinical Observer: Neurology (Neuromuscular)	2 Units	This course is a 2 week intensive experience offered summer, fall, and spring semesters on a schedule set by the Department of Neurology at University Hospitals Case Medical Center.  Students are expected to be present and observe at all of the times set forth by the house staff and attending, generally a 40 hour week minimum. The Objective of the course is to provide the students with the experience of observing patient care provided by 3rd year medical students on a clinical rotation under direct supervision by house staff and attending on an active acute Neurology Service. The PGY-2 Neurology Resident and PGY-3 Chief Resident will always be available for immediate supervision.  Students round as Clinical Observers with the CWRU medical students according to their daily schedule. They will learn the basics of neurological history-taking, neurological examination, neurodiagnostic studies, and neurological therapeutics. Didactic sessions covering a wide range of neurologic and neurosurgical topics are covered by faculty members from both departments. The lectures cover the gamut of neurological and neurosurgical disease processes and treatments. Neurosurgery lectures include such topics as cerebrovascular disease, brain tumors, hydrocephalus, spinal disorders, and head trauma as well as doctor-patient communication. Unlike the medical students on the rotation, a Clinical Observer will only observe procedures and will not actively take part in any health care. He/she will act strictly as an observer, but will act as a physiological consultant to the team responsible for providing basic science input to the clinical cases. Prereq: PHOL 481, PHOL 482, PHOL 483, PHOL 484, PHOL 498A, and PHOL 498B. Coreq:  PHOL 620A, PHOL 620B, or PHOL 620C.
PHOL 621	Clinical Nephrology Observer	4 Units	This course is a total of 4 week intensive experience offered on the School of Medicine elective schedule.  Students will round with fellow and Medicine residents rotating during the elective on a daily basis starting with morning work rounds.  Attending rounds generally begin in the afternoon. The student is restricted to a total of 15 hrs/ week on clinical rounds. The student is expected to read appropriate or assigned text, journal and internet resources for necessary background reading; the time spent on these resources do not count toward the 15 hrs/week for rounds.  The fellow or attending physician on the service will recommend to the course director (Dr. Liedtke) whether the student earned a Pass or Fail in the course based upon attendance, professional demeanor, active participation, and knowledge of the area.  The course director is responsible for assigning the grades for this course. CITI training must be completed prior to enrollment. Prereq: PHOL 481, PHOL 482, PHOL 483, PHOL 484, PHOL 498A, PHOL 498B.
PHOL 622	Pediatric Pulmonology Observation	2 Units	Pediatric  Pulmonology Observation (must be approved). 2 credit hours.  Location: University Hospital, Rainbow Babies & Children Hospital.  This course is an intensive experience with 2 weeks offered on the elective schedule detailed in Appendix A and 1 week with attending physician reading PFTs.  For 2 weeks, students will round with attending staff and medical students according to their daily schedule at Rainbow Babies & Children Hospital, Pulmonary Division, starting with morning work rounds.  Attending rounds generally begin in the afternoon.  The student will not have direct patient contact.  The student is expected to read appropriate or assigned text, journal and internet resources for necessary background reading. Students will journal their daily experience.  Students will write a paper relating basic physiology to a case identified during rounds; the Director (Dr. Liedtke) will grade the paper.  The attending physician on the service will recommend to the course director (Dr. Liedtke) based upon attendance, professional demeanor, active participation, and knowledge of the area.  The course director is responsible for assigning the grades for this course.  Dr. Ross Meyers will serve as the student's mentor and assign students to services. Prereq: PHOL 481, PHOL 482, PHOL 483, PHOL 484, PHOL 498A, and PHOL498B.
PHOL 623	Adult Pulmonology Observation	2 Units	Adult Pulmonology AOC (must be approved). 2 credit hours.  Location: University Hospital and VA Hospital.  This course is an intensive experience with 2 weeks offered on the elective schedule detailed in Appendix A and 1 week with attending physician reading PFTs to evaluate 25 adult PFT, 6 exercise tests, and 6 methacholine challenges.  For 2 weeks, students will round with attending staff and medical students according to their daily schedule at University Hospital starting with morning work rounds.  Attending rounds generally begin in the afternoon. The student will not have direct patient contact.  The student is expected to read appropriate or assigned text, journal and internet resources for necessary background reading. Students will journal their daily experience.  Students will write a paper relating basic physiology to a case identified during rounds; the Director (Dr. Liedtke) will grade the paper.  The attending physician on the service will recommend to the course director (Dr. Liedtke) based upon attendance, professional demeanor, active participation, and knowledge of the area.  The course director is responsible for assigning the grades for this course.  Dr. (TBN) will serve as the student's mentor and assign students to services. Prereq: PHOL 481, PHOL 482, PHOL 483, PHOL 484, PHOL 498A, and PHOL 498B.
PHOL 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
PHOL 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
POSC 109	The U.S. Political System	3 Units	This course provides an overview of governmental institutions and processes in the United States, the political forces that combine to shape them, and how we might best understand the system that government and politics create.
POSC 160	Introduction to Comparative Politics	3 Units	Comparative politics is the study of processes and institutions within countries. Prompted by real-world puzzles, comparativists investigate broad, theoretical questions such as: What constitutes a revolution, and why do revolutions occur? How does one country become more democratic than another? Why do relations between some ethnic groups turn violent? This course introduces students to some of the central puzzles and theories of comparative politics in order to help them better understand world events. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 172	Introduction to International Relations	3 Units	Why do countries fight wars?  Can nuclear proliferation be curtailed?  Does trade help developing countries or harm them?  This survey of the field of International Relations examines "big questions" in world politics.  It introduces themes including the rise, development and changes of the nation-state system; patterns and causes of international conflict and cooperation; international law, organizations, and transnational institutions; the roles of both state and non-state actors in international politics; and the methods used to understand this field.
POSC 301	Decision-Making in American Cities	3 Units	Localities are the primary interface with government and provide the basic psychological place identification for most Americans.  The course will explore this assertion in the context of urban America today.  How are decisions made in cities?  Who shapes these decisions and why?  What role is played by shifting demographics, race, and poverty?  What can the individual do to influence local decision-making? Offered as POSC 301 and POSC 401.
POSC 306	Interest Groups in the Policy Process	3 Units	Introduction to the institutions and processes that make up the political environment of nonprofit and other organizations in the United States, beginning with an examination of the role of civil society in a democracy and continuing with the framing of issues, role of political entrepreneurs and organized interests, elections, the legislative process and strategies for influencing it, and the roles of executive institutions and the courts. Offered as POSC 306 and POSC 406.
POSC 308	The American Presidency	3 Units	The sources of, strategies of, and restraints on presidential leadership in the United States. Emphasis on problems of policy formation, presidential relations with Congress and executive agencies, and the electoral process. Offered as POSC 308 and POSC 408.
POSC 310	Congress in an Era of Polarization	3 Units	A study of Congress in the modern era with emphasis on the development of polarization, procedural changes, conflict between the legislative and executive branches during divided government, and the current state of representation.  Offered as POSC 310 and POSC 410.
POSC 318	People and Planet	3 Units	In this course, we study the way in which the environment is a matter of politics.  Our approach is philosophical, examining the concept of politics in light of how societies shape their environment on Earth.  This elucidation's aim is practical.  We want to know not only what environmental politics is, but what we should do about it.  Students from any major are welcome, without prerequisite. Offered as PHIL 318, POSC 318 and ESTD 318.
POSC 319	Politics and Money	3 Units	One of the most famous definitions of politics comes from Harold Laswell, who described it as the struggle over "who gets what, when, how."  Money is at the center of most political conflict.  It is a resource, a motivation, and an end unto itself.  This course will examine the role of money in politics, with particular emphasis on American politics.  We will discuss the role of money in elections, in the policy-making process, and what it means for representation.  The course will begin with the question of the role that financial consideration play in public opinion and voting behavior.  We will then address the role that money plays in election results, both in terms of its role in financing campaigns, and the relationship between the state of the economy and election results.  Finally, we will discuss the policy-making process.  In that context, we will address the role that interest groups play in the process, and how the quest for economic benefits for one's constituency motivates the behavior of elected officials.  We will conclude by discussing how policy changes at the systematic level occur and the influence that various groups have on policy outcomes. Offered as POSC 319 and POSC 419.
POSC 321	News Media and Politics	3 Units	Analysis of the political role of the news media in American government and politics. Examines the fascinating relationship between reporters and politicians. Covers the overall structure and legal position of the media as well as the media's impact on the American political system. Offered as POSC 321 and POSC 421.
POSC 322	Political Movements and Political Participation	3 Units	Political Movements and Political Participation is concerned with the variety of ways citizens engage in collective activism in the United States and across national boundaries, and with the conditions under which citizens identify common concerns and join together in political movements to bring about change.  The course begins with an examination of three general bodies of theory and research on political movements: resource mobilization, political opportunity structures, and cultural framing.  We will also investigate frameworks of political participation for understanding the relationships among different expressions of collective activism and representation.  In the context of these sometimes competing theories, we will consider 1) the conditions under which political movements are likely to emerge, as well as the circumstances in which collective political action is precluded; 2) how citizens come to recognize collective grievances and shared political identities; 3) the strategies and tactics of organized movements, and their likelihood of political success; and 4) the relationship between political movements, political parties, and the state. Offered as POSC 322 and POSC 422.
POSC 323	Judicial Politics	3 Units	Rejecting the view that judges mechanically apply the law, the study of judicial politics seeks to understand the behavior of judges as political actors with policy goals. Topics include judicial selection and socialization, judicial policy change, judicial strategy (especially the strategic interaction of judges on multi-judge panels), the interaction of courts in hierarchical judicial systems, the policy impact of judicial decisions, and the courts' interactions with coordinate branches of government (the executive, Congress, state governments, state courts). Primary focus will be on the federal judiciary, with some discussion of state judicial systems. Offered as POSC 323 and POSC 423.
POSC 325	American Constitutional Law	3 Units	An introductory survey of U.S. constitutional law.  Special attention given to the historical, philosophical, and political dimensions of landmark Supreme Court cases. Judicial review, federalism, separation of powers, due process, and equal protection.  Supreme Court's involvement in major political controversies: the New Deal, abortion, physician-assisted suicide, school desegregation, and affirmative action. Offered as POSC 325 and POSC 425.
POSC 326	Constitutions in Practical Politics	3 Units	Overview of ancient Greek and Roman constitution-making, medieval principles, emergence of modern constitutionalism, and the constitutionalist vision of the American and French Revolutions. Examination of contemporary constitutional issues and developments in countries such as Canada, France, Germany, Great Britain, Ethiopia, India, and the United States. Offered as POSC 326 and POSC 426. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 327	Civil Liberties in America	3 Units	Supreme Court's interpretation of the First Amendment: liberty of religion through the establishment and free exercise clauses, freedoms of speech and the press, of assembly and association.  The "pure tolerance" view examined against subversive speech, "fighting words," libel, and obscenity.  Survey of content-neutral regulation, symbolic expression, and current efforts to limit expression (campus speech codes and the feminist anti-pornography movement). Offered as POSC 327 and POSC 427.
POSC 328	Topics in Civil Liberties	3 Units	Rights of the accused as outlined in the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Eighth Amendments.  Topics covered are (1) arrests, searches, and seizures, (2) the privilege against compelled self-incrimination, (3) the rights to counsel, confrontation, and jury trial, and (4) the prohibition against cruel and unusual punishments.  Case-specific approach but presents interplay of history, philosophy, and politics as background of each topic. Offered as POSC 328 and POSC 428.
POSC 334	Comparative Political Violence	3 Units	This is a non-standard, simulation based course analyzing the causes and processes of political violence in comparative perspective. The course begins by engaging some classic philosophical work on power, conflict, and violence. It then moves to specific cases drawn at different historical periods and from across the world (North America, Asia, Africa, and the Middle East). For each case, students are organized into groups representing actual political actors. Collaborative research and written assignments serve to prepare each group for an in-class simulation exercise. Simulations vary in format and goals but each comprises a group grade and an individual written project. Offered as POSC 334 and POSC 434. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 341	US Political Parties and Elections	3 Units	Political Parties and Elections examines the development and history of political parties in the US, examining the impact of electoral systems and law at the national and local levels, the impact on key events in shaping the parties' ideologies, policy preferences, and core constituencies.  The course reviews key party realignments and asks whether the US is experiencing a party realignment in response to party polarization and populist challenges.  It also considers candidate emergence, campaign strategies, and campaign finance in the context of the US political party system. Offered as POSC 341 and POSC 441.
POSC 343	Public Opinion and American Democracy	3 Units	Examination of theories, concepts and empirical research related to attitudes and the political behavior of mass publics. Offered as POSC 343 and POSC 443.
POSC 346	Women, Power, and Politics	3 Units	Women, Power, and Politics involves a critical examination of the impact of gender on the forms and distributions of power and politics, with primary reference to the experience of women in the United States.  Major concerns of the course include the political meanings and import of "sex," "gender," and "politics;" the relationship between women and the state; how women organize collectively to influence state policies; and how the state facilitates and constrains women's access to and exercise of political power.  The course is organized around four foci central to the study of women and politics.  The first section of the course focuses on the meanings of "women," "gender," and "politics."  In this section, we will consider how these concepts intersect and the ways in which each may be used to deepen our understanding of the workings of governments and political systems, and of women's relative political powerlessness.  The second section of the course employs these concepts to understand the (re) emergence of the US feminist movement, its meanings, practices, and goals, and its transformation across US political history.  In the third section, we turn to conventional electoral politics, focusing on women's candidacies, their campaigns, and women's voting behavior.  In the final section of the course, we consider those general factors that might provide for increased gender equality and improved life status for women, in global, comparative perspective. Offered as POSC 346, POSC 446 and WGST 346. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
POSC 348	History of Modern Political and Social Thought	3 Units	This course explores the responses of philosophers, economic theorists, culture critics, and public policy makers to changes in western society wrought by industrialization by focusing on their concerns with technological change. Offered as HSTY 348, HSTY 448 and POSC 348.
POSC 349	Political Science Research Methods	3 Units	This course examines approaches that political scientists use to understand events and processes.  In doing so, the course provides students with skills helpful to completing senior projects, such as the ability to evaluate and conduct research.  Through exercises and projects, students will take part in the research process from constructing a question to developing a research design to interpreting results.  Students will learn and apply key techniques, including inductive and deductive reasoning, hypothesis construction, operationalization of concepts, measurements, sampling and probability, causal inference, and the logic of controls.  They will produce materials common to the discipline, such as research designs.  Offered as POSC 349 and POSC 449. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
POSC 351	Modern Political Thought	3 Units	Examination of a limited topic in the study of modern political thought. Topics vary. Offered as POSC 351 and POSC 451.
POSC 352	American Political Thought	3 Units	Examination of the unique contribution to the science of government made by American political thinkers. Offered as POSC 352 and POSC 452.
POSC 353	Political Thought and Political Change in China	3 Units	"No state is forever strong or forever weak," said Han Feizi, China's great legalist philosopher.  He believed that as a country's conditions changed, the laws and institutions had to change to meet these new circumstances.  China today faces new circumstances that have caused deep and broad challenges to its people.  This has prompted serious debate among intellectuals, leaders, and average citizens about the possibility for and direction of political reform.  But what might that reform look like, and how would it be conceived, if it could overcome the current barriers?  This seminar will provide a fuller understanding of China's potential for political change by examining Chinese political though from Confucius, Mencius and Han Feizi through Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping.  These and other political philosophies have influenced China's political culture, which will influence the form of any change. Offered as POSC 353 and POSC 453.
POSC 354	Political and Social Philosophy	3 Units	Justification of social institutions, primarily political ones. Such distinctions as that between de facto and legitimate authority; analysis of criteria for evaluation, such as social justice and equality; inquiry into theories of justification of the state; theory of democratic government and its alternatives. Readings from classical and contemporary sources. Recommended preparation: PHIL 101. Offered as PHIL 334, POSC 354, PHIL 434, and POSC 454.
POSC 355	Modern Political Ideologies	3 Units	Substance and nature of ideological thinking in the contemporary world via a survey of political "isms"--for example, liberalism, libertarianism, conservatism, fascism, socialism, and even more recent trends such as feminism, environmentalism, etc. Offered as POSC 355 and POSC 455.
POSC 356	Transitions to Democracy and Dictatorship	3 Units	Everyday life is dramatically different depending on whether one resides in a democracy or under a dictatorship.  This course examines why some countries have democracies and others dictatorships.  It explores successful, incomplete, and failed transitions to democracy.  The incomplete transitions result in hybrid regimes, stuck between democracy and dictatorship, and the outright failures result in non-democracies, such as dictatorships. The course examines examples from most regions of the world, including Africa, Asia, Europe, the Middle East, the former Soviet Union, North America, and South America.  Offered as POSC 356 and POSC 456. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 357	Economic, Environmental, and Health Challenges: The Impact of Democracy	3 Units	To what extent does democracy result in positive economic, environmental, and health outcomes?  Instructed by faculty from the disciplines of ecology, economics, epidemiology, medicine, and political science, students will learn about current economic, environmental, and public health problems and various democratic and non-democratic political institutions.  They will read and discuss the latest findings about how democratic and non-democratic political institutions impact economic, environmental, and public health outcomes.  Topics include economic inequality, economic growth, global warming, air pollution, infectious and chronic diseases, and worker health and safety.  Building on this foundation of knowledge, students will work together to investigate the impact of political institutions on problems of their own choosing. Offered as POSC 357 and POSC 457. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 358	Political Strategy	3 Units	This course examines practical applications of prominent political science theories.  It is partly a how-to course covering a broad range of political activities, but the primary objective is to link practical issues with theories to help you understand why events happen the way they do.  The course focuses on American politics, but the materials will be applicable to a wide range of situations.  The course is a seminar requiring regular student presentations that will generate discussion about the readings and current events. Papers consist of analysis of current events, and require students to analyze the strategies used by prominent figures in the context of the theories we discuss in class.   Offered as POSC 358 and POSC 458. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
POSC 360	Revolts and Revolutions in Global Perspective	3 Units	The Arab protests of 2011 gripped the attention of the world.  Young protestors succeeded in unseating some long time rulers but in other cases tense standoffs have evolved.  This course takes those events as a starting point to examine the broader political history of revolts and revolutions in the global south.  The first part of the course examines some of the classic social science debates about what constitutes revolution, what leads to revolution, and what the effects can be.  The second part of the course analyzes specific cases in Europe, Latin America, Africa, and Asia to understand the causes and consequences of revolt and revolution.  What drives everyday persons to brave the dangers of protest?  When and why do political leaders decide to resist or reform?  What happens when revolts fail?  What happens when they succeed?  Material for the course will include classic social science narratives, revolutionary polemics, popular analyses of events since 2011, examples of social media as political action, and first person narratives. Offered as POSC 360 and POSC 460. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 363	The Politics of Electoral Systems	3 Units	Elections involve more than a simple act of voting to express individual preferences. The rules under which countries conduct elections determine who controls the executive and how votes are converted into legislative seats. The mechanics of various electoral arrangements will be examined in detail and the consequences for the political system discussed in terms of strategies and desired outcomes on the part of contestants in terms of democratic representation. Students will research individual countries and analyze recent elections from both qualitative and quantitative perspectives. Offered as POSC 363 and POSC 463. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
POSC 364	Dictatorship and Democracy in Modern Latin America	3 Units	Examination of political leadership in 20th-century Latin America, exploring the nature, causes, and consequences of dictatorship and democracy in the region, moving from the collapse of oligarchic rule and the emergence of populism in the 1930s and 1940s, to the end of democracy and establishment of military regimes in the 1960s and 1970s, and ultimately to the contemporary processes of democratization and economic liberalization. Offered as ETHS 364, POSC 364, and POSC 464. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 367	Western European Political Systems	3 Units	Comparative analysis of sociopolitical systems of selected Western European industrial democracies, using North American systems as a point of comparison. Offered as POSC 367 and POSC 467.
POSC 369	Social Justice Issues in Latin America	3 Units	This course explores ethnicity, gender, and religion in Latin American politics and society, and then tackles revolution, democracy, and populism. Throughout, the region's history, geography, and culture are taken into account--for example, the European and indigenous legacies in Mexico and Perú, Bolivia, Chile, and Ecuador;  the Asian presence in Perú and Brazil; the African contributions to Cuba and Brazil; female heads of state, such as Nicaragua's Violeta Chamorro, Chile's Michelle Bachelet, Argentina's Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, Costa Rica's Laura Chinchilla, and Brazil's Dilma Rousseff.  Liberation Theology and the current Pope's worries about the declining number of Catholics in the region are also addressed. Today's multiparty democracy in Mexico, Hugo Chávez's legacy in Venezuela, and Cuba's international humanitarian aid and ideological aims would not be possible without revolution(s) and populism. They are inevitably intertwined with ethnicity, gender, and religion.  This course aims to encourage a better understanding of Latin America and its relation to the rest of the world. Offered as ETHS 369, POSC 369 and POSC 469. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 370A	Political Economy	3 Units	Focus on debates concerning the proper relationship between political and economic systems, including conservative, liberal, and radical perspectives. The politics of international economics and the economics of international politics receive separate attention. The course concludes with study of "modern" political economy and the application of economic theory to the study of political systems. Offered as POSC 370A and POSC 470A.
POSC 370C	The United States and Asia	3 Units	Survey and analysis of U.S.-Asia relations in the post-World War II period. Focus specifically is on the interaction of politics and economics in the United States' relations with Japan, China, and Southeast Asian countries. Topics will include the role of Asia in U.S. Cold War policies, the dynamics of U.S.-Japan alliance politics, post-Cold War issues involving U.S. foreign policy toward Asia, a history and analysis of economic conflict cooperation, and an examination of the move toward Asia-Pacific "regionalism." Offered as POSC 370C and POSC 470C.
POSC 370D	The Politics of China	3 Units	Now more than ever, the Chinese state and society are facing tremendous economic, social, and political challenges.  This course presents an overview of current issues facing the People's Republic, including a changing (or not) political culture, policy processes and outcomes at the national and local levels, reform and economic growth, the resultant societal changes and pressures, and the consequent challenges the Communist Party faces as demand for political reform grows.  The class involves a mixture of lectures and discussion and draws on a combination of primary and secondary sources, including current news reports and films. Offered as POSC 370D and POSC 470D. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 370F	Financial Politics in the United States and the World	3 Units	This course explores how political institutions make policy in the financial area with particular emphasis on the United States.  Using a bureaucratic politics framework, it examines money, banks and the securities industry by integrating a wide range of literature in economics and political science.  Specific objectives include familiarizing students with different approaches to the political economy of finance from different disciplines, exploring the historical evolution of finance, examining the changing relationship between public and private authority within the financial system, considering how politics operates in a crisis, and evaluating the role of international financial institutions in the global economy.  By taking this course, students will equip themselves for further research into politics and economics, as well as offer them tools to analyze future policy developments as they unfold. Offered as POSC 370F and POSC 470F.
POSC 370H	China's Foreign Policy	3 Units	The rise of China is evident in the country's more forward and robust foreign policy that began in 1979.  At every turn, nations throughout the world must now consider China wherever their interests are at stake, be it Korea and Northeast Asia, Indochina and Southeast Asia, India/Pakistan and South Asia, or Afghanistan and Iran in the Middle East, not to mention the many African states that welcome Chinese investment but chafe at China's presence.  Further, China is increasingly aggressive in international trade, a major determinant of its foreign policy.  This course describes the key factors that make up Chinese foreign policy, including its cultural tradition, policy-making institutions, the role of the military, and domestic determinants of foreign policy.  The course also examines China's ever-changing foreign policy strategies, from an aggressive posture to charming its neighbors only to become more strident once again.  The course will also examine China's role involving possible mercantilism, currency manipulation, and the hunt for traditional and alternative energy sources.  Throughout the course, we will pay attention to how China's foreign policy relates to international relations theories and what strategies might be used to manage China's growing role in international affairs. Offered as POSC 370H and POSC 470H. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 370J	International Law and Organizations	3 Units	Study of international organizations and international law as two means for regulating and coordinating nation-state behavior. History of the two techniques will be traced, covering 19th century efforts at cooperation, the League of Nations and the United Nations, regional and specialized global organization. The functions of international law in global politics will be stressed, with primary focus on the evolving role of law in dealing with global problems, e.g., war, the environment, economic cooperation, and human rights. Offered as POSC 370J and POSC 470J.
POSC 370M	Theories of Political Economy	3 Units	This course is a SAGES departmental seminar in political economy that brings a wide range of theoretical perspectives to bear on the relations between market and state in the contemporary world. It focuses on three questions: What have been the major debates concerning the role of the government in the economy?  How were these debates resolved in the compromise of embedded liberalism, and What experiences have individual states had with these questions of political economy? To answer these questions, we will read original literature to uncover the connections among politics, economics, and the world of ideas that has resulted in the political debates we confront today. Offered as POSC 370M and POSC 470M. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
POSC 370N	Economics and Politics in Global Governance	3 Units	The political and economic dynamics at work in a country both establish the conditions leading up to crises and frame the policy choices available to resolve it. This course addresses these interactive dynamics by combining the research and career expertise of the discipline of Political Science and Macroeconomics and Financial Regulation in a team-taught course.  It explores how financial crises have been managed in world history by paying particular attention to the way governance structures operate to help or hurt the outcome.  The emphasis combines a sophisticated understanding of the mechanics of the intervention as well as the politics inside each International Financial Institution involved.   Specifically, the course begins by reviewing the history of the Federal Reserve and the gold standard, the Great Depression and the operations of the Bretton Woods System.  Next, it looks at the sovereign debt crises of the 1980s and the International Monetary Fund.  It picks up the history with Japan's crisis in the 1990s and the later interventions of the International Monetary Fund, Bank for International Settlements, Federal Reserve, European Commission, and European Central Bank to the present era. Offered as POSC 370N and POSC 470N.
POSC 371	Natural Resources and World Politics	3 Units	Examination of the political causes and ramifications of the uneven distribution of the valuable natural resources for modern industrial societies. Strategic and military issues and the exploitation of the sea bed. Examination in some detail of selected commodity issues, including petroleum, copper and uranium. Offered as POSC 371 and POSC 471.
POSC 373	Politics of the European Union	3 Units	The evolution of the European Union ranks among the most significant developments in contemporary European and international history. It is an extraordinary illustration of successful cooperation among sovereign countries and a fascinating laboratory for political scientists and others interested in the building of polities, markets and societies. Yet scholars have disagreed about nearly every important aspect of its origins, nature and implications; and with the United Kingdom's departure (Brexit), the pandemic and its consequences, democratic backsliding (in some member states) and other crises, they are arguing about whether and how the EU can endure recent and future challenges. The seminar's readings, discussions and written assignments will introduce students to the main debates and cover past and ongoing developments. Offered as POSC 373 and POSC 473.
POSC 374	Politics of Development in the Global South	3 Units	Exploration of the post-World War II emergence of the Global South nations of Africa, Asia, the Middle East, Latin America, and the Eastern Europe arena. Offered as ETHS 374, POSC 374, and POSC 474.
POSC 375	The International Politics of Technology	3 Units	Technology is deeply political.  Nowhere is this statement more evident than in the realm of international relations, where governments perceive technology as a source of power and wealth and a symbol of relative position and modernity.  Yet for centuries skeptics have questioned the economic rationale of government technology policies.  Still, to this day, countries support emulation, innovation and a host of other strategies as means for catching up with leading nations or locking in current advantages.  What lies behind such policies?  What do they accomplish?  And what are the domestic and international politics surrounding them? After reading classic arguments, including texts by Adam Smith, Alexander Hamilton and Friedrich List, students will consider 20th and 21st century debates and an array of experiments tried by poor, middle-income and rich countries.  Cases include the development of new industries; the imposition of sanctions; the dilemma of dual technologies and military spillovers; the forging of national champions; the reorganization of banks and the creation of international financial centers; the copying of regional clusters (e.g. Silicon Valley) and stock markets (e.g. the Nasdaq); and the extraterritorial extension of domestic regulation and governance techniques.  There are no prerequisites and first year students are welcome. Offered as POSC 375 and POSC 475. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
POSC 376	United States Foreign Policy	3 Units	Focus on U.S. foreign policy making with a dynamic network of executive and congressional actors and organizations; analysis of traditional and contemporary U.S. foreign policies from nuclear defense to current economic resource issues; future role of the United States in world affairs. Offered as POSC 376 and POSC 476.
POSC 377	Politics of Russia	3 Units	Russia faces three problems: the creation of a sovereign state, the development of a new political system, and the restructuring of its economy. In this course we will challenge the assumption that the outcome of these three transitions will be a strong, democratic, capitalist country. We will ask whether civil war, organized crime, an immature party system, poor social services, and nomenklatura privatization bode poorly for these three transformations. Offered as POSC 377 and POSC 477. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 378	International Relations Theory	3 Units	This course is a seminar in international relations theory. As such, we will bring a wide range of theoretical perspectives to bear on issues and debates in the area of international relations by systematically studying the evolution of the world system.  The seminar is roughly divided into a first half focusing on war and the political system, and a second half focusing on trade, finance and the economic system.  Each section devotes particular attention to ethical problems associated with political and economic issues.  This course should develop students' ability to read and critically evaluate academic literature in the field of international relations, and enable students to produce a scholarly paper on one substantive area of the field. Offered as POSC 378 and POSC 478. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
POSC 379	Introduction to Middle East Politics	3 Units	This is an introductory course about Middle East Politics, in regional as well as international aspects.  In this course we will explore broad social, economic, and political themes that have defined the region since the end of World War Two.  Since this is an introductory course, a major goal will be to gain comparative knowledge about the region's states and peoples.  The countries that comprise the modern Middle East are quite diverse; therefore, we will only be able to focus on a few cases in depth.  A second goal is to use the tools and theories social scientists employ to answer broad questions related to the region, such as: How have colonial legacies shaped political and economic development in the Middle East?  How do oil, religion, and identity interact with politics?  How have external powers affected the region's political development?  What do the uprisings of 2011 hold for the region's future? Offered as POSC 379 and POSC 479. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 380A	State and War in Africa and the Middle East	3 Units	The Middle East, North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa remain the most volatile and conflict prone regions of the world.  Traditional approaches to war and state conflict have emphasized systemic variables, such as balance of power, military capabilities, perceptions, the security dilemma, and of course anarchy.  While these concepts have generated much academic interest, their ability to explain and understand conflict in the developing world is severely limited.  This is due to the basic fact that nearly all conflict in the world today is not between states but is taking place within state boundaries.  What drives these conflicts?  Are there common factors and patterns within the Middle East and Africa?  How does sub-state conflict affect political and economic development?  What are the most likely resolution strategies?  Recommended preparation: POSC 379. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
POSC 382A	Public Policy in Child Development	3 Units	This course introduces students to issues in public policy that impact children and families. Local, state, and federal child policy will be considered, and topics will include, for example, policies related to child poverty, education, child welfare, juvenile justice, and children's physical and mental health. Students will learn how policy is developed, how research informs policy and vice versa, and a framework for analyzing social policy. Recommended preparation: One social sciences course or consent. Offered as ANTH 305, ANTH 405, CHST 301, CHST 401, and POSC 382A.
POSC 383	Health Policy and Politics in the United States	3 Units	Overview of the principal institutions, processes, social forces, and ideas shaping the U.S. health system.  Historical, political, economic, and sociological perspectives on the health system are explored as well as the intellectual context of recent policy changes, challenges, and developments.  Students will acquire a sense of how health services are financed and delivered in the U.S.  They will also learn how to assess its performance compared to that of other similar countries. Offered as POSC 383 and POSC 483.
POSC 384	Ethics and Public Policy	3 Units	Evaluation of ethical arguments in contemporary public policymaking discourse.  That is, approaches to evaluating not only the efficiency of policy (Will this policy achieve its end for the least cost?) but also the ethics of policy (Are a policy's intended ends ethically justified or "good," and are our means to achieve those ends moral or "just"?).  Overview of political ideologies that supply U.S. political actors with their ethical or moral arguments when proposing and implementing public policy, followed by an application of these differing perspectives to selected policy areas such as welfare, euthanasia, school choice, drug laws, censorship, or others. Offered as PHIL 384, PHIL 484, POSC 384 and POSC 484.
POSC 385	Doing Government Work: Public Administration in the U.S.	3 Units	This course focuses on how governments, particularly governments in the United States, do their work.  The topic is often called "public administration," or "implementation," or "bureaucratic politics."  It involves what James Q. Wilson calls government "operators" such as teachers, public health doctors, agricultural extension agents, grant administrators and Seal teams.  Their actions depend on their own values; conflict among political authorities, and on what is needed to perform specific tasks.  We will begin by discussing the challenges of organizing to do anything, or organization theory; turn to the peculiar political context of administration in the United States; and apply these understandings to specific government activities.  Students should emerge with a better understanding of why government agencies do what they do, and why they succeed or fail. Offered as POSC 385 and POSC 485. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
POSC 386	Making Public Policy	3 Units	Politics is about who wins, who loses, and why.  Policy, by contrast, is often depicted as more "neutral;" policies are the means through which political decisions are carried out.  In this class, we examine the notion that policy is the rational, impartial counterpart to the political arena.  We will ask: How are public policies made?  Why do some issues make it on to the agenda, while others do not?  Can we separate facts from values, or are both always contested?  We will examine how decision-making in a group introduces distinct challenges for policymaking.  The course focuses on widely applicable themes of policymaking, drawing on both domestic and international examples. Offered as POSC 386 and POSC 486.
POSC 388	Politics, Policy, and the Global Environment	3 Units	This course examines the law, politics and policy surrounding global environmental challenges such as climate change.  The course aims to provide a broad overview of the key concepts, actors, debates, and issues in global environmental politics.  It aims to illustrate the complexities of addressing environmental problems-from the proliferation of global institutions and international actors, to the absence of central enforcement mechanisms.  We examine the causes of environmental degradation and competing views on the gravity of the problem.  Using concepts from political science and economics, we investigate the challenges in getting states to act jointly to address environmental problems.  We examine the actors and institutions of global environmental politics, to understand how conditions are defined as problems and responses are chosen and implemented.  The course concludes by applying the tools and concepts to the case of climate change. Offered as ESTD 388, POSC 388 and POSC 488.
POSC 389	Special Topics in American Politics and Policy	3 Units	Specific topic will vary but will consist of an in-depth investigation of a particular policy area or political phenomenon. Topics will involve policy controversies of some current interest. Offered as AFST 389, POSC 389, and POSC 489.
POSC 390	Special Topics in International Relations	3 Units	This course will vary semester to semester and will focus on International Relations topics such as statecraft and diplomacy in contemporary world affairs; weak states and international sovereignty; and transnational soft law. A description of the topic(s) being covered will be available on the political science website each semester that the course is offered. Students may take this course more than once for up to 9 credits, when different topics are covered. Offered as POSC 390 and POSC 490.
POSC 391	Special Topics in Comparative Politics	3 Units	This course will vary semester to semester and will focus on comparative politics topics involving political issues and/or controversies of some current interest. These may include some of the following: federal vs unitary political systems, nationalism and national identity, independence movements in developed countries, comparative political behavior, national and supranational political organization, comparative public policy, political violence and violent conflict, comparative political economy, varieties of democracy, the comparative politics of gender, comparative race and ethnicity, among others. A description of the specific course topic focus will be available on the political science website each semester that the course is offered. Students may take this course more than once (up to 9 credits) so long as the topics are different.  Offered as POSC 391 and POSC 491.
POSC 395	Special Projects	1 - 6 Units	Study of a topic of particular interest, and/or independent academic work associated with an approved internship. The student must submit to the departmental office a project prospectus form, approved and signed by the faculty supervisor, no later than the end of the second week of classes. The prospectus must outline the goals of the project and the research methodology to be used, and is part of the basis for grading. The prospectus form is available from the departmental office or from the department's webpage.
POSC 396	Senior Project SAGES Capstone	3 Units	Capstone experience for political science majors or senior POSC minors as part of the SAGES program, providing opportunity to do an in-depth paper on a topic of particular interest to them. Students must obtain approval from a faculty project advisor and list that advisor on the registration form. The advisor must sign and student submit to department a prospectus including goals, schedule, and research methodology. This paper should demonstrate, and ideally even extend, the skills and expertise developed over the course of study in the department. Upon completion of the capstone, students will be expected to present their work in a public forum.  Recommended preparation: Junior or Senior political science major or senior political science minor and departmental prospectus form. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
POSC 401	Decision-Making in American Cities	3 Units	Localities are the primary interface with government and provide the basic psychological place identification for most Americans.  The course will explore this assertion in the context of urban America today.  How are decisions made in cities?  Who shapes these decisions and why?  What role is played by shifting demographics, race, and poverty?  What can the individual do to influence local decision-making? Offered as POSC 301 and POSC 401.
POSC 406	Interest Groups in the Policy Process	3 Units	Introduction to the institutions and processes that make up the political environment of nonprofit and other organizations in the United States, beginning with an examination of the role of civil society in a democracy and continuing with the framing of issues, role of political entrepreneurs and organized interests, elections, the legislative process and strategies for influencing it, and the roles of executive institutions and the courts. Offered as POSC 306 and POSC 406.
POSC 408	The American Presidency	3 Units	The sources of, strategies of, and restraints on presidential leadership in the United States. Emphasis on problems of policy formation, presidential relations with Congress and executive agencies, and the electoral process. Offered as POSC 308 and POSC 408.
POSC 410	Congress in an Era of Polarization	3 Units	A study of Congress in the modern era with emphasis on the development of polarization, procedural changes, conflict between the legislative and executive branches during divided government, and the current state of representation.  Offered as POSC 310 and POSC 410.
POSC 419	Politics and Money	3 Units	One of the most famous definitions of politics comes from Harold Laswell, who described it as the struggle over "who gets what, when, how."  Money is at the center of most political conflict.  It is a resource, a motivation, and an end unto itself.  This course will examine the role of money in politics, with particular emphasis on American politics.  We will discuss the role of money in elections, in the policy-making process, and what it means for representation.  The course will begin with the question of the role that financial consideration play in public opinion and voting behavior.  We will then address the role that money plays in election results, both in terms of its role in financing campaigns, and the relationship between the state of the economy and election results.  Finally, we will discuss the policy-making process.  In that context, we will address the role that interest groups play in the process, and how the quest for economic benefits for one's constituency motivates the behavior of elected officials.  We will conclude by discussing how policy changes at the systematic level occur and the influence that various groups have on policy outcomes. Offered as POSC 319 and POSC 419.
POSC 421	News Media and Politics	3 Units	Analysis of the political role of the news media in American government and politics. Examines the fascinating relationship between reporters and politicians. Covers the overall structure and legal position of the media as well as the media's impact on the American political system. Offered as POSC 321 and POSC 421.
POSC 422	Political Movements and Political Participation	3 Units	Political Movements and Political Participation is concerned with the variety of ways citizens engage in collective activism in the United States and across national boundaries, and with the conditions under which citizens identify common concerns and join together in political movements to bring about change.  The course begins with an examination of three general bodies of theory and research on political movements: resource mobilization, political opportunity structures, and cultural framing.  We will also investigate frameworks of political participation for understanding the relationships among different expressions of collective activism and representation.  In the context of these sometimes competing theories, we will consider 1) the conditions under which political movements are likely to emerge, as well as the circumstances in which collective political action is precluded; 2) how citizens come to recognize collective grievances and shared political identities; 3) the strategies and tactics of organized movements, and their likelihood of political success; and 4) the relationship between political movements, political parties, and the state. Offered as POSC 322 and POSC 422.
POSC 423	Judicial Politics	3 Units	Rejecting the view that judges mechanically apply the law, the study of judicial politics seeks to understand the behavior of judges as political actors with policy goals. Topics include judicial selection and socialization, judicial policy change, judicial strategy (especially the strategic interaction of judges on multi-judge panels), the interaction of courts in hierarchical judicial systems, the policy impact of judicial decisions, and the courts' interactions with coordinate branches of government (the executive, Congress, state governments, state courts). Primary focus will be on the federal judiciary, with some discussion of state judicial systems. Offered as POSC 323 and POSC 423.
POSC 425	American Constitutional Law	3 Units	An introductory survey of U.S. constitutional law.  Special attention given to the historical, philosophical, and political dimensions of landmark Supreme Court cases. Judicial review, federalism, separation of powers, due process, and equal protection.  Supreme Court's involvement in major political controversies: the New Deal, abortion, physician-assisted suicide, school desegregation, and affirmative action. Offered as POSC 325 and POSC 425.
POSC 426	Constitutions in Practical Politics	3 Units	Overview of ancient Greek and Roman constitution-making, medieval principles, emergence of modern constitutionalism, and the constitutionalist vision of the American and French Revolutions. Examination of contemporary constitutional issues and developments in countries such as Canada, France, Germany, Great Britain, Ethiopia, India, and the United States. Offered as POSC 326 and POSC 426. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 427	Civil Liberties in America	3 Units	Supreme Court's interpretation of the First Amendment: liberty of religion through the establishment and free exercise clauses, freedoms of speech and the press, of assembly and association.  The "pure tolerance" view examined against subversive speech, "fighting words," libel, and obscenity.  Survey of content-neutral regulation, symbolic expression, and current efforts to limit expression (campus speech codes and the feminist anti-pornography movement). Offered as POSC 327 and POSC 427.
POSC 428	Topics in Civil Liberties	3 Units	Rights of the accused as outlined in the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Eighth Amendments.  Topics covered are (1) arrests, searches, and seizures, (2) the privilege against compelled self-incrimination, (3) the rights to counsel, confrontation, and jury trial, and (4) the prohibition against cruel and unusual punishments.  Case-specific approach but presents interplay of history, philosophy, and politics as background of each topic. Offered as POSC 328 and POSC 428.
POSC 434	Comparative Political Violence	3 Units	This is a non-standard, simulation based course analyzing the causes and processes of political violence in comparative perspective. The course begins by engaging some classic philosophical work on power, conflict, and violence. It then moves to specific cases drawn at different historical periods and from across the world (North America, Asia, Africa, and the Middle East). For each case, students are organized into groups representing actual political actors. Collaborative research and written assignments serve to prepare each group for an in-class simulation exercise. Simulations vary in format and goals but each comprises a group grade and an individual written project. Offered as POSC 334 and POSC 434. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 441	US Political Parties and Elections	3 Units	Political Parties and Elections examines the development and history of political parties in the US, examining the impact of electoral systems and law at the national and local levels, the impact on key events in shaping the parties' ideologies, policy preferences, and core constituencies.  The course reviews key party realignments and asks whether the US is experiencing a party realignment in response to party polarization and populist challenges.  It also considers candidate emergence, campaign strategies, and campaign finance in the context of the US political party system. Offered as POSC 341 and POSC 441.
POSC 443	Public Opinion and American Democracy	3 Units	Examination of theories, concepts and empirical research related to attitudes and the political behavior of mass publics. Offered as POSC 343 and POSC 443.
POSC 446	Women, Power, and Politics	3 Units	Women, Power, and Politics involves a critical examination of the impact of gender on the forms and distributions of power and politics, with primary reference to the experience of women in the United States.  Major concerns of the course include the political meanings and import of "sex," "gender," and "politics;" the relationship between women and the state; how women organize collectively to influence state policies; and how the state facilitates and constrains women's access to and exercise of political power.  The course is organized around four foci central to the study of women and politics.  The first section of the course focuses on the meanings of "women," "gender," and "politics."  In this section, we will consider how these concepts intersect and the ways in which each may be used to deepen our understanding of the workings of governments and political systems, and of women's relative political powerlessness.  The second section of the course employs these concepts to understand the (re) emergence of the US feminist movement, its meanings, practices, and goals, and its transformation across US political history.  In the third section, we turn to conventional electoral politics, focusing on women's candidacies, their campaigns, and women's voting behavior.  In the final section of the course, we consider those general factors that might provide for increased gender equality and improved life status for women, in global, comparative perspective. Offered as POSC 346, POSC 446 and WGST 346. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
POSC 449	Political Science Research Methods	3 Units	This course examines approaches that political scientists use to understand events and processes.  In doing so, the course provides students with skills helpful to completing senior projects, such as the ability to evaluate and conduct research.  Through exercises and projects, students will take part in the research process from constructing a question to developing a research design to interpreting results.  Students will learn and apply key techniques, including inductive and deductive reasoning, hypothesis construction, operationalization of concepts, measurements, sampling and probability, causal inference, and the logic of controls.  They will produce materials common to the discipline, such as research designs.  Offered as POSC 349 and POSC 449. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
POSC 451	Modern Political Thought	3 Units	Examination of a limited topic in the study of modern political thought. Topics vary. Offered as POSC 351 and POSC 451.
POSC 452	American Political Thought	3 Units	Examination of the unique contribution to the science of government made by American political thinkers. Offered as POSC 352 and POSC 452.
POSC 453	Political Thought and Political Change in China	3 Units	"No state is forever strong or forever weak," said Han Feizi, China's great legalist philosopher.  He believed that as a country's conditions changed, the laws and institutions had to change to meet these new circumstances.  China today faces new circumstances that have caused deep and broad challenges to its people.  This has prompted serious debate among intellectuals, leaders, and average citizens about the possibility for and direction of political reform.  But what might that reform look like, and how would it be conceived, if it could overcome the current barriers?  This seminar will provide a fuller understanding of China's potential for political change by examining Chinese political though from Confucius, Mencius and Han Feizi through Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping.  These and other political philosophies have influenced China's political culture, which will influence the form of any change. Offered as POSC 353 and POSC 453.
POSC 454	Political and Social Philosophy	3 Units	Justification of social institutions, primarily political ones. Such distinctions as that between de facto and legitimate authority; analysis of criteria for evaluation, such as social justice and equality; inquiry into theories of justification of the state; theory of democratic government and its alternatives. Readings from classical and contemporary sources. Recommended preparation: PHIL 101. Offered as PHIL 334, POSC 354, PHIL 434, and POSC 454.
POSC 455	Modern Political Ideologies	3 Units	Substance and nature of ideological thinking in the contemporary world via a survey of political "isms"--for example, liberalism, libertarianism, conservatism, fascism, socialism, and even more recent trends such as feminism, environmentalism, etc. Offered as POSC 355 and POSC 455.
POSC 456	Transitions to Democracy and Dictatorship	3 Units	Everyday life is dramatically different depending on whether one resides in a democracy or under a dictatorship.  This course examines why some countries have democracies and others dictatorships.  It explores successful, incomplete, and failed transitions to democracy.  The incomplete transitions result in hybrid regimes, stuck between democracy and dictatorship, and the outright failures result in non-democracies, such as dictatorships. The course examines examples from most regions of the world, including Africa, Asia, Europe, the Middle East, the former Soviet Union, North America, and South America.  Offered as POSC 356 and POSC 456. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 457	Economic, Environmental, and Health Challenges: The Impact of Democracy	3 Units	To what extent does democracy result in positive economic, environmental, and health outcomes?  Instructed by faculty from the disciplines of ecology, economics, epidemiology, medicine, and political science, students will learn about current economic, environmental, and public health problems and various democratic and non-democratic political institutions.  They will read and discuss the latest findings about how democratic and non-democratic political institutions impact economic, environmental, and public health outcomes.  Topics include economic inequality, economic growth, global warming, air pollution, infectious and chronic diseases, and worker health and safety.  Building on this foundation of knowledge, students will work together to investigate the impact of political institutions on problems of their own choosing. Offered as POSC 357 and POSC 457. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 458	Political Strategy	3 Units	This course examines practical applications of prominent political science theories.  It is partly a how-to course covering a broad range of political activities, but the primary objective is to link practical issues with theories to help you understand why events happen the way they do.  The course focuses on American politics, but the materials will be applicable to a wide range of situations.  The course is a seminar requiring regular student presentations that will generate discussion about the readings and current events. Papers consist of analysis of current events, and require students to analyze the strategies used by prominent figures in the context of the theories we discuss in class.   Offered as POSC 358 and POSC 458. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
POSC 460	Revolts and Revolutions in Global Perspective	3 Units	The Arab protests of 2011 gripped the attention of the world.  Young protestors succeeded in unseating some long time rulers but in other cases tense standoffs have evolved.  This course takes those events as a starting point to examine the broader political history of revolts and revolutions in the global south.  The first part of the course examines some of the classic social science debates about what constitutes revolution, what leads to revolution, and what the effects can be.  The second part of the course analyzes specific cases in Europe, Latin America, Africa, and Asia to understand the causes and consequences of revolt and revolution.  What drives everyday persons to brave the dangers of protest?  When and why do political leaders decide to resist or reform?  What happens when revolts fail?  What happens when they succeed?  Material for the course will include classic social science narratives, revolutionary polemics, popular analyses of events since 2011, examples of social media as political action, and first person narratives. Offered as POSC 360 and POSC 460. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 463	The Politics of Electoral Systems	3 Units	Elections involve more than a simple act of voting to express individual preferences. The rules under which countries conduct elections determine who controls the executive and how votes are converted into legislative seats. The mechanics of various electoral arrangements will be examined in detail and the consequences for the political system discussed in terms of strategies and desired outcomes on the part of contestants in terms of democratic representation. Students will research individual countries and analyze recent elections from both qualitative and quantitative perspectives. Offered as POSC 363 and POSC 463. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
POSC 464	Dictatorship and Democracy in Modern Latin America	3 Units	Examination of political leadership in 20th-century Latin America, exploring the nature, causes, and consequences of dictatorship and democracy in the region, moving from the collapse of oligarchic rule and the emergence of populism in the 1930s and 1940s, to the end of democracy and establishment of military regimes in the 1960s and 1970s, and ultimately to the contemporary processes of democratization and economic liberalization. Offered as ETHS 364, POSC 364, and POSC 464. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 467	Western European Political Systems	3 Units	Comparative analysis of sociopolitical systems of selected Western European industrial democracies, using North American systems as a point of comparison. Offered as POSC 367 and POSC 467.
POSC 469	Social Justice Issues in Latin America	3 Units	This course explores ethnicity, gender, and religion in Latin American politics and society, and then tackles revolution, democracy, and populism. Throughout, the region's history, geography, and culture are taken into account--for example, the European and indigenous legacies in Mexico and Perú, Bolivia, Chile, and Ecuador;  the Asian presence in Perú and Brazil; the African contributions to Cuba and Brazil; female heads of state, such as Nicaragua's Violeta Chamorro, Chile's Michelle Bachelet, Argentina's Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, Costa Rica's Laura Chinchilla, and Brazil's Dilma Rousseff.  Liberation Theology and the current Pope's worries about the declining number of Catholics in the region are also addressed. Today's multiparty democracy in Mexico, Hugo Chávez's legacy in Venezuela, and Cuba's international humanitarian aid and ideological aims would not be possible without revolution(s) and populism. They are inevitably intertwined with ethnicity, gender, and religion.  This course aims to encourage a better understanding of Latin America and its relation to the rest of the world. Offered as ETHS 369, POSC 369 and POSC 469. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 470A	Political Economy	3 Units	Focus on debates concerning the proper relationship between political and economic systems, including conservative, liberal, and radical perspectives. The politics of international economics and the economics of international politics receive separate attention. The course concludes with study of "modern" political economy and the application of economic theory to the study of political systems. Offered as POSC 370A and POSC 470A.
POSC 470C	The United States and Asia	3 Units	Survey and analysis of U.S.-Asia relations in the post-World War II period. Focus specifically is on the interaction of politics and economics in the United States' relations with Japan, China, and Southeast Asian countries. Topics will include the role of Asia in U.S. Cold War policies, the dynamics of U.S.-Japan alliance politics, post-Cold War issues involving U.S. foreign policy toward Asia, a history and analysis of economic conflict cooperation, and an examination of the move toward Asia-Pacific "regionalism." Offered as POSC 370C and POSC 470C.
POSC 470D	The Politics of China	3 Units	Now more than ever, the Chinese state and society are facing tremendous economic, social, and political challenges.  This course presents an overview of current issues facing the People's Republic, including a changing (or not) political culture, policy processes and outcomes at the national and local levels, reform and economic growth, the resultant societal changes and pressures, and the consequent challenges the Communist Party faces as demand for political reform grows.  The class involves a mixture of lectures and discussion and draws on a combination of primary and secondary sources, including current news reports and films. Offered as POSC 370D and POSC 470D. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 470F	Financial Politics in the United States and the World	3 Units	This course explores how political institutions make policy in the financial area with particular emphasis on the United States.  Using a bureaucratic politics framework, it examines money, banks and the securities industry by integrating a wide range of literature in economics and political science.  Specific objectives include familiarizing students with different approaches to the political economy of finance from different disciplines, exploring the historical evolution of finance, examining the changing relationship between public and private authority within the financial system, considering how politics operates in a crisis, and evaluating the role of international financial institutions in the global economy.  By taking this course, students will equip themselves for further research into politics and economics, as well as offer them tools to analyze future policy developments as they unfold. Offered as POSC 370F and POSC 470F.
POSC 470H	China's Foreign Policy	3 Units	The rise of China is evident in the country's more forward and robust foreign policy that began in 1979.  At every turn, nations throughout the world must now consider China wherever their interests are at stake, be it Korea and Northeast Asia, Indochina and Southeast Asia, India/Pakistan and South Asia, or Afghanistan and Iran in the Middle East, not to mention the many African states that welcome Chinese investment but chafe at China's presence.  Further, China is increasingly aggressive in international trade, a major determinant of its foreign policy.  This course describes the key factors that make up Chinese foreign policy, including its cultural tradition, policy-making institutions, the role of the military, and domestic determinants of foreign policy.  The course also examines China's ever-changing foreign policy strategies, from an aggressive posture to charming its neighbors only to become more strident once again.  The course will also examine China's role involving possible mercantilism, currency manipulation, and the hunt for traditional and alternative energy sources.  Throughout the course, we will pay attention to how China's foreign policy relates to international relations theories and what strategies might be used to manage China's growing role in international affairs. Offered as POSC 370H and POSC 470H. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 470J	International Law and Organizations	3 Units	Study of international organizations and international law as two means for regulating and coordinating nation-state behavior. History of the two techniques will be traced, covering 19th century efforts at cooperation, the League of Nations and the United Nations, regional and specialized global organization. The functions of international law in global politics will be stressed, with primary focus on the evolving role of law in dealing with global problems, e.g., war, the environment, economic cooperation, and human rights. Offered as POSC 370J and POSC 470J.
POSC 470M	Theories of Political Economy	3 Units	This course is a SAGES departmental seminar in political economy that brings a wide range of theoretical perspectives to bear on the relations between market and state in the contemporary world. It focuses on three questions: What have been the major debates concerning the role of the government in the economy?  How were these debates resolved in the compromise of embedded liberalism, and What experiences have individual states had with these questions of political economy? To answer these questions, we will read original literature to uncover the connections among politics, economics, and the world of ideas that has resulted in the political debates we confront today. Offered as POSC 370M and POSC 470M. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
POSC 470N	Economics and Politics in Global Governance	3 Units	The political and economic dynamics at work in a country both establish the conditions leading up to crises and frame the policy choices available to resolve it. This course addresses these interactive dynamics by combining the research and career expertise of the discipline of Political Science and Macroeconomics and Financial Regulation in a team-taught course.  It explores how financial crises have been managed in world history by paying particular attention to the way governance structures operate to help or hurt the outcome.  The emphasis combines a sophisticated understanding of the mechanics of the intervention as well as the politics inside each International Financial Institution involved.   Specifically, the course begins by reviewing the history of the Federal Reserve and the gold standard, the Great Depression and the operations of the Bretton Woods System.  Next, it looks at the sovereign debt crises of the 1980s and the International Monetary Fund.  It picks up the history with Japan's crisis in the 1990s and the later interventions of the International Monetary Fund, Bank for International Settlements, Federal Reserve, European Commission, and European Central Bank to the present era. Offered as POSC 370N and POSC 470N.
POSC 471	Natural Resources and World Politics	3 Units	Examination of the political causes and ramifications of the uneven distribution of the valuable natural resources for modern industrial societies. Strategic and military issues and the exploitation of the sea bed. Examination in some detail of selected commodity issues, including petroleum, copper and uranium. Offered as POSC 371 and POSC 471.
POSC 473	Politics of the European Union	3 Units	The evolution of the European Union ranks among the most significant developments in contemporary European and international history. It is an extraordinary illustration of successful cooperation among sovereign countries and a fascinating laboratory for political scientists and others interested in the building of polities, markets and societies. Yet scholars have disagreed about nearly every important aspect of its origins, nature and implications; and with the United Kingdom's departure (Brexit), the pandemic and its consequences, democratic backsliding (in some member states) and other crises, they are arguing about whether and how the EU can endure recent and future challenges. The seminar's readings, discussions and written assignments will introduce students to the main debates and cover past and ongoing developments. Offered as POSC 373 and POSC 473.
POSC 474	Politics of Development in the Global South	3 Units	Exploration of the post-World War II emergence of the Global South nations of Africa, Asia, the Middle East, Latin America, and the Eastern Europe arena. Offered as ETHS 374, POSC 374, and POSC 474.
POSC 475	The International Politics of Technology	3 Units	Technology is deeply political.  Nowhere is this statement more evident than in the realm of international relations, where governments perceive technology as a source of power and wealth and a symbol of relative position and modernity.  Yet for centuries skeptics have questioned the economic rationale of government technology policies.  Still, to this day, countries support emulation, innovation and a host of other strategies as means for catching up with leading nations or locking in current advantages.  What lies behind such policies?  What do they accomplish?  And what are the domestic and international politics surrounding them? After reading classic arguments, including texts by Adam Smith, Alexander Hamilton and Friedrich List, students will consider 20th and 21st century debates and an array of experiments tried by poor, middle-income and rich countries.  Cases include the development of new industries; the imposition of sanctions; the dilemma of dual technologies and military spillovers; the forging of national champions; the reorganization of banks and the creation of international financial centers; the copying of regional clusters (e.g. Silicon Valley) and stock markets (e.g. the Nasdaq); and the extraterritorial extension of domestic regulation and governance techniques.  There are no prerequisites and first year students are welcome. Offered as POSC 375 and POSC 475. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
POSC 476	United States Foreign Policy	3 Units	Focus on U.S. foreign policy making with a dynamic network of executive and congressional actors and organizations; analysis of traditional and contemporary U.S. foreign policies from nuclear defense to current economic resource issues; future role of the United States in world affairs. Offered as POSC 376 and POSC 476.
POSC 477	Politics of Russia	3 Units	Russia faces three problems: the creation of a sovereign state, the development of a new political system, and the restructuring of its economy. In this course we will challenge the assumption that the outcome of these three transitions will be a strong, democratic, capitalist country. We will ask whether civil war, organized crime, an immature party system, poor social services, and nomenklatura privatization bode poorly for these three transformations. Offered as POSC 377 and POSC 477. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 478	International Relations Theory	3 Units	This course is a seminar in international relations theory. As such, we will bring a wide range of theoretical perspectives to bear on issues and debates in the area of international relations by systematically studying the evolution of the world system.  The seminar is roughly divided into a first half focusing on war and the political system, and a second half focusing on trade, finance and the economic system.  Each section devotes particular attention to ethical problems associated with political and economic issues.  This course should develop students' ability to read and critically evaluate academic literature in the field of international relations, and enable students to produce a scholarly paper on one substantive area of the field. Offered as POSC 378 and POSC 478. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
POSC 479	Introduction to Middle East Politics	3 Units	This is an introductory course about Middle East Politics, in regional as well as international aspects.  In this course we will explore broad social, economic, and political themes that have defined the region since the end of World War Two.  Since this is an introductory course, a major goal will be to gain comparative knowledge about the region's states and peoples.  The countries that comprise the modern Middle East are quite diverse; therefore, we will only be able to focus on a few cases in depth.  A second goal is to use the tools and theories social scientists employ to answer broad questions related to the region, such as: How have colonial legacies shaped political and economic development in the Middle East?  How do oil, religion, and identity interact with politics?  How have external powers affected the region's political development?  What do the uprisings of 2011 hold for the region's future? Offered as POSC 379 and POSC 479. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
POSC 483	Health Policy and Politics in the United States	3 Units	Overview of the principal institutions, processes, social forces, and ideas shaping the U.S. health system.  Historical, political, economic, and sociological perspectives on the health system are explored as well as the intellectual context of recent policy changes, challenges, and developments.  Students will acquire a sense of how health services are financed and delivered in the U.S.  They will also learn how to assess its performance compared to that of other similar countries. Offered as POSC 383 and POSC 483.
POSC 484	Ethics and Public Policy	3 Units	Evaluation of ethical arguments in contemporary public policymaking discourse.  That is, approaches to evaluating not only the efficiency of policy (Will this policy achieve its end for the least cost?) but also the ethics of policy (Are a policy's intended ends ethically justified or "good," and are our means to achieve those ends moral or "just"?).  Overview of political ideologies that supply U.S. political actors with their ethical or moral arguments when proposing and implementing public policy, followed by an application of these differing perspectives to selected policy areas such as welfare, euthanasia, school choice, drug laws, censorship, or others. Offered as PHIL 384, PHIL 484, POSC 384 and POSC 484.
POSC 485	Doing Government Work: Public Administration in the U.S.	3 Units	This course focuses on how governments, particularly governments in the United States, do their work.  The topic is often called "public administration," or "implementation," or "bureaucratic politics."  It involves what James Q. Wilson calls government "operators" such as teachers, public health doctors, agricultural extension agents, grant administrators and Seal teams.  Their actions depend on their own values; conflict among political authorities, and on what is needed to perform specific tasks.  We will begin by discussing the challenges of organizing to do anything, or organization theory; turn to the peculiar political context of administration in the United States; and apply these understandings to specific government activities.  Students should emerge with a better understanding of why government agencies do what they do, and why they succeed or fail. Offered as POSC 385 and POSC 485. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
POSC 486	Making Public Policy	3 Units	Politics is about who wins, who loses, and why.  Policy, by contrast, is often depicted as more "neutral;" policies are the means through which political decisions are carried out.  In this class, we examine the notion that policy is the rational, impartial counterpart to the political arena.  We will ask: How are public policies made?  Why do some issues make it on to the agenda, while others do not?  Can we separate facts from values, or are both always contested?  We will examine how decision-making in a group introduces distinct challenges for policymaking.  The course focuses on widely applicable themes of policymaking, drawing on both domestic and international examples. Offered as POSC 386 and POSC 486.
POSC 488	Politics, Policy, and the Global Environment	3 Units	This course examines the law, politics and policy surrounding global environmental challenges such as climate change.  The course aims to provide a broad overview of the key concepts, actors, debates, and issues in global environmental politics.  It aims to illustrate the complexities of addressing environmental problems-from the proliferation of global institutions and international actors, to the absence of central enforcement mechanisms.  We examine the causes of environmental degradation and competing views on the gravity of the problem.  Using concepts from political science and economics, we investigate the challenges in getting states to act jointly to address environmental problems.  We examine the actors and institutions of global environmental politics, to understand how conditions are defined as problems and responses are chosen and implemented.  The course concludes by applying the tools and concepts to the case of climate change. Offered as ESTD 388, POSC 388 and POSC 488.
POSC 489	Special Topics in American Politics and Policy	3 Units	Specific topic will vary but will consist of an in-depth investigation of a particular policy area or political phenomenon. Topics will involve policy controversies of some current interest. Offered as AFST 389, POSC 389, and POSC 489.
POSC 490	Special Topics in International Relations	3 Units	This course will vary semester to semester and will focus on International Relations topics such as statecraft and diplomacy in contemporary world affairs; weak states and international sovereignty; and transnational soft law. A description of the topic(s) being covered will be available on the political science website each semester that the course is offered. Students may take this course more than once for up to 9 credits, when different topics are covered. Offered as POSC 390 and POSC 490.
POSC 491	Special Topics in Comparative Politics	3 Units	This course will vary semester to semester and will focus on comparative politics topics involving political issues and/or controversies of some current interest. These may include some of the following: federal vs unitary political systems, nationalism and national identity, independence movements in developed countries, comparative political behavior, national and supranational political organization, comparative public policy, political violence and violent conflict, comparative political economy, varieties of democracy, the comparative politics of gender, comparative race and ethnicity, among others. A description of the specific course topic focus will be available on the political science website each semester that the course is offered. Students may take this course more than once (up to 9 credits) so long as the topics are different.  Offered as POSC 391 and POSC 491.
POSC 495	Independent Study	3 Units	Graduate level independent study taken for a grade.
POSC 651	Thesis M.A.	1 - 6 Units	Independent study of a research question and completion of a major research paper. An approved prospectus is required. Prereq: Graduate standing.
POSC 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
PQHS 411	Introduction to Health Behavior	3 Units	Using a biopsychosocial perspective, an overview of the measurement and modeling of behavioral, social, psychological, and environmental factors related to disease prevention, disease management, and health promotion is provided. Offered as PQHS 411 and MPHP 411. Prereq: Enrollment limited to Master of Public Health or Epidemiology & Biostatistics students.
PQHS 414	Data Management and Statistical Programming	3 Units	This is an online course that offers no in-person meetings.  This course serves as a general introduction to the use of computer systems in epidemiologic investigations and biostatistical applications. Students will develop a conceptual understanding of data types, basic data structures, relational database systems and data normalization, data warehousing, control statements, and programming logic. Further, students will develop basic scripting skills and will learn to read in, manipulate, and perform basic descriptive analyses on research data using the SAS programming language. Primary emphasis in this course is on developing the knowledge and familiarity required to work with data in a statistical programming context. Basic familiarity with statistics is beneficial, as this course does not teach inferential statistical analysis in detail, but it is not vital to learning the course material.
PQHS 416	Computing in Biomedical Health Informatics	3 Units	This course introduces students to computational techniques and concepts that underpin biomedical and health informatics data management and analysis. In particular, the course will focus on the three topics of: (1) Biomedical terminologies and formal logic used in building knowledge models such as ontologies; (2) Natural language processing (NLP), and (3) Big Data technologies, including components of Hadoop stack and Apache Spark. This is a lecture-based course that relies on both materials covered in class and out-of-class readings of published literature. Students will be assigned reading assignments, homework exercise assignments and they are expected to complete homework assignment for each class. The students will be involved in a team project and they will be expected to prepare a project report at the end of the semester.
PQHS 419	Topics in Urban Health in the United States	3 Units	The focus of this course is on designing sustainable urban policies and programs for advancing health equity in Greater Cleveland. The course builds on recent declarations of racism as a public health crisis in Cuyahoga County and the City of Cleveland and ongoing work in applying system dynamics to addressing structural racism for advancing regional equity.  The course introduces the use of system dynamics for understanding urban health inequities and designing sustainable social policies and programs for advancing health equity. The course will cover model structure and its relationships to prior knowledge and assumptions, measurable quantities, and ultimate use in solving problems. Application areas focus on social issues of equity in health, education, and general wellbeing emphasizing transdisciplinary integration of systems (vertically from cells to society and horizontality across systems). Model verification is discussed, along with the basic theory and practice of system dynamics.  Quantitative methods are emphasized including the formulation and testing of mathematical models of feedback systems and the use of numeric data and estimation of parameters.   Special attention will be given to understanding the dynamics of social and economic justice, value and ethical issues, as well as issues related to race, ethnicity, culture, gender, sexual orientation, religion, physical or mental disability or illness, age, and national origin. Offered as PQHS 419 and MPHP 419.
PQHS 426	An Introduction to GIS for Health and Social Sciences	3 Units	This course is designed to give students a first exposure to understanding how GIS is integral to understanding a wide variety of public health problems. It introduces students to current spatial approaches in health research and provides a set of core skills that will allow students to apply these techniques toward their own interests.  Subject matter will include chronic diseases, infectious diseases, and vectored diseases examples. Other topics related to social determinants of health and current events (e.g., violence, overdoses, disaster and homelessness) will also be incorporated. Students will be exposed to different types of data and different applications of these data (for example, hospitals, police departments), enabling them to think "outside the box" about how GIS can be utilized to solve real-world problems. Students will learn classic mapping and hotspot techniques. In addition, they will be introduced to novel ways to collect geospatial field data using online sources (Google Street View), primary data collection (spatial video) and mixed method approaches (spatial video geonarratives), all of which represent the cutting edge of spatial epidemiology. Offered as MPHP 426 and PQHS 426.
PQHS 430	Basics of Probability and Statistical Theory	0 Unit	A basic introduction to the principles of probability and statistics. Necessary math and calculus will be reviewed. This course is paired with PQHS 431 and aims to give students a brief background in statistical theory which will give students the knowledge and foundation to intuitively apply statistics in practice. Topics covered include: conditional probability, independence, random variables, means, variance, probability mass functions, probability density functions, cumulative distribution functions, correlation, covariance, simulations, random samples, likelihood, maximum likelihood estimators, hypothesis testing, and the likelihood ratio test. Coreq: PQHS 431.
PQHS 431	Statistical Methods I	3 Units	Application of statistical techniques with particular emphasis on problems in the biomedical sciences.  Basic probability theory, random variables, and distribution functions.  Point and interval estimation, regression, and correlation.  Problems whose solution involves using packaged statistical programs.  First part of year-long sequence. Offered as ANAT 431, BIOL 431, CRSP 431, PQHS 431 and MPHP 431.
PQHS 432	Statistical Methods II	3 Units	Methods of analysis of variance, regression and analysis of quantitative data.  Emphasis on computer solution of problems drawn from the biomedical sciences.  Design of experiments, power of tests, and adequacy of models.  Offered as BIOL 432, PQHS 432, CRSP 432 and MPHP 432. Prereq: PQHS 431.
PQHS 433	Community Interventions and Program Evaluation	3 Units	This course prepares students to design, conduct, and assess community-based health interventions and program evaluation. Topics include assessment of need, evaluator/stakeholder relationship, process vs. outcome-based objectives, data collection, assessment of program objective achievement based on process and impact, cost-benefit analyses, and preparing the evaluation report to stakeholders. Recommended preparation: PQHS 490, PQHS 431, or MPHP 405. Offered as PQHS 433 and MPHP 433.
PQHS 435	Survival Data Analysis	3 Units	Basic concepts of survival analysis including hazard function, survival function, types of censoring; non-parametric models; extended Cox models: time dependent variables, piece-wise Cox model, etc.; sample size requirements for survival studies. Prereq or Coreq: PQHS 432.
PQHS 440	Introduction to Population Health	3 Units	Introduces graduate students to the multiple determinants of health including the social, economic and physical environment, health services, individual behavior, genetics and their interactions. It aims to provide students with the broad understanding of the research development and design for studying population health, the prevention and intervention strategies for improving population health and the disparities that exist in morbidity, mortality, functional and quality of life. Format is primarily group discussion around current readings in the field; significant reading is required.
PQHS 444	Communicating in Population Health Science Research	1 Unit	Doctoral class on scientific communication. The semester-long course focuses on scientific writing, with an emphasis on manuscript and grant writing, and scientific oral presentations. As a required class for the Department of Population and Quantitative Health Sciences (PQHS) Epidemiology and Biostatistics and Biomedical Health Informatics (BHI) PhD programs, emphasis will be placed on scientific topics and anticipated requirements (e.g., departmental seminar in PQHS 501) related to graduate students in these programs. Recommended preparation: PhD students in PQHS. Other students permitted if space available. Fluency in English writing (e.g., in accord with the Harbrace College Handbook). Prereq: PQHS 431 and PQHS 490.  Prereq or Coreq: PQHS 432.
PQHS 445	Research Ethics in Population Health Sciences	0 Unit	This zero credit course is a required add-on for PhD students in Epidemiology and Biostatistics.  Students will register and fulfill all requirements for IBMS 500 "Being a Professional Scientist".  The purpose of PQHS 445 is to address specialized population health topics not covered by IBMS 500, including international research, human genomics, and/or big data/electronic medical records.  There will be no meetings/lectures for this course.  Students will complete a short written assignment due at the end of the semester.
PQHS 450	Clinical Trials and Intervention Studies	3 Units	Issues in the design, organization, and operation of randomized, controlled clinical trials and intervention studies. Emphasis on long-term multicenter trials. Topics include legal and ethical issues in the design; application of concepts of controls, masking, and randomization; steps required for quality data collection; monitoring for evidence of adverse or beneficial treatment effects; elements of organizational structure; sample size calculations and data analysis procedures; and common mistakes. Recommended preparation: PQHS 431. Offered as PQHS 450 and MPHP 450.
PQHS 451	A Data-Driven Introduction to Genomics and Human Health	3 Units	This course introduces the foundational concepts of genomics and genetic epidemiology through four key principles: 1) Teaching students how to query relational databases using Structure Query Language (SQL); 2) Exposing students to the most current data used in genomics and bioinformatics research, providing a quantitative understanding of biological concepts; 3) Integrating newly learned concepts with prior ones to discover new relationships among biological concepts; and 4) providing historical context to how and why data were generated and stored in the way they were, and how this gave rise to modern concepts in genomics.    Offered as PQHS 451, GENE 451, and MPHP 451. Prereq: PQHS 431 and PQHS 490 or Requisites Not Met permission.
PQHS 452	Statistical Methods for Genetic Epidemiology	3 Units	Analytic methods for evaluating the role of genetic factors in human disease, and their interactions with environmental factors. Statistical methods for the estimation of genetic parameters and testing of genetic hypotheses, emphasizing maximum likelihood methods. Models to be considered will include such components as genetic loci of major effect, polygenic inheritance, and environmental, cultural and developmental effects. Topics will include familial aggregation, segregation and linkage analysis, ascertainment, linkage disequilibrium, and disease marker association studies. Recommended preparation: PQHS 431 and PQHS 451.
PQHS 453	Categorical Data Analysis	3 Units	Categorical data are often encountered in many disciplines including the fields of clinical and biological sciences. Analysis methods for categorical data are different from the analysis methods for continuous data. There is a rich collection of methods for categorical data analysis. The elegant "odds ratio"  interpretation associated with categorical data is a unique one. This online course will cover cross-sectional categorical data analysis theories and methods. From this course, students will learn standard categorical data analysis methods and its applications to biomedical and clinical studies. This course will focus mostly on statistical methods for categorical data analysis arising from various fields of study including clinical studies. The course will include recorded-video lectures, quizzes, homeworks, simulations, and data analysis on real and realistic problems in human health tied directly to the student's own professional interests. The focus will be given to logistic regression methods. Topics may include (but are not limited to) binary response, multicategory response, count response, model selection, and evaluation, and exact inference methods for categorical data. This course stresses how the core statistical principles, computing tools, and visualization strategies are used to address complex scientific aims powerfully and efficiently, and to communicate those findings effectively to researchers who may have little or no experience in these methods. Prereq: PQHS 431.
PQHS 457	Current Issues in Genetic Epidemiology: Design and Analysis of Sequencing Studies	3 Units	Statistical methods to deal with the opportunities and challenges in Genetic Epidemiology brought about by modern sequencing technology. Some computational issues that arise in the analysis of large sequence data sets will be discussed. The course includes hands-on experience in the analysis of large sequence data sets, in a collaborative setting. Prereq: PQHS 451 and PQHS 452.
PQHS 459	Longitudinal Data Analysis	3 Units	This course will cover statistical methods for the analysis of longitudinal data with an emphasis on application in biological and health research.  Topics include exploratory data analysis, response feature analysis, growth curve models, mixed-effects models, generalized estimating equations, and missing data. Prereq: PQHS 432.
PQHS 464	Obesity and Cancer: Views from Molecules to Health Policy	3 Units	This course will provide an overview of the components of energy balance (diet, physical activity, resting metabolic rate, dietary induced thermogenesis) and obesity, a consequence of long term positive energy balance, and various types of cancer. Following an overview of energy balance and epidemiological evidence for the obesity epidemic, the course will proceed with an introduction to the cellular and molecular biology of energy metabolism. Then, emerging research on biologically plausible connections and epidemiological associations between obesity and various types of cancer (e.g., colon, breast) will be presented. Finally, interventions targeted at decreasing obesity and improving quality of life in cancer patients will be discussed. The course will be cooperatively-taught by a transdisciplinary team of scientists engaged in research in energy balance and/or cancer. Didactic lectures will be combined with classroom discussion of readings. The paper assignment will involve application of course principles, lectures and readings. Offered as PQHS 464 and MPHP 464.
PQHS 465	Design and Measurement in Population Health Sciences	3 Units	This course focuses on common design and measurement approaches used in population health sciences research. This course covers the preliminary considerations used in selecting qualitative, quantitative and mixed methods research approaches including an understanding of different philosophical worldviews, strategies of inquiry and methods and procedures for each approach. The course also includes an introduction to survey design and related concepts of latent variables, factor analysis and reliability and validity. Students will develop an in-depth knowledge of these design and measurement approaches through readings, lectures, group discussions and written and oral project presentations. Prereq: PQHS 440, PQHS 431, PQHS 490, PQHS 432, PQHS 460, PQHS 444 and PQHS 445.
PQHS 466	Promoting Health Across Boundaries	3 Units	This course examines the concepts of health and boundary spanning and how the synergy of the two can produce new, effective approaches to promoting health. Students will explore and analyze examples of individuals and organizations boundary spanning for health to identify practice features affecting health, compare and contrast practices and approaches, and evaluate features and context that promote or inhibit boundary spanning and promoting health. Offered as MPHP 466, PQHS 466, SOCI 466, NURS 466 and BETH 466. Prereq: Graduate student status or instructor consent.
PQHS 467	Comparative and Cost Effectiveness Research	1 Unit	Comparative effectiveness research is a cornerstone of healthcare reform.  It holds the promise of improved health outcomes and cost containment.  This course is presented in a convenient 5-day intensive format in June.  There are reading assignments due prior to the 1st session.  Module A, Days 1-2: Overview of comparative effectiveness research (CER) from a wide array of perspectives: individual provider, institution, insurer, patient, government, and society.  Legal, ethical and social issues, as well as implications for population and public health, including health disparities will also be a component. Module B, Day 3: Introduction to the various methods, and their strengths, weaknesses and limitations.  How to read and understand CER papers. Module C, Days 4-5: Cost-Effectiveness Analysis.  This will cover costing, cost analysis, clinical decision analysis, quality of life and cost-effectiveness analysis for comparing alternative health care strategies.  Trial version of TreeAge software will be used to create and analyze a simple cost-effectiveness model.  The full 3-credit course is for taking all 3 modules.  Modules A or C can be taken alone for 1 credit.  Modules A and B or Modules B and C can be taken together for a total of  2 credits.  Module B cannot be taken alone.  If taking for 2 or 3 credits, some combination of term paper, project and/or exam will be due 30 days later. Offered as PQHS 467 and MPHP 467.
PQHS 468	The Continual Improvement of Healthcare: An Interdisciplinary Course	3 Units	This course prepares students to be members of interprofessional teams to engage in the continual improvement in health care.  The focus is on working together for the benefit of patients and communities to enhance quality and safety. Offered as PQHS 468, MPHP 468, and NURS 468.
PQHS 471	Machine Learning & Data Mining	3 Units	Vast amount of data are being collected in medical and social research and in many industries. Such big data generate a demand for efficient and practical tools to analyze the data and to identify unknown patterns. We will cover a variety of statistical machine learning techniques (supervised learning) and data mining techniques (unsupervised learning), with data examples from biomedical and social research. Specifically, we will cover prediction model building and model selection (shrinkage, Lasso), classification (logistic regression, discriminant analysis, k-nearest neighbors), tree-based methods (bagging, random forests, boosting), support vector machines, association rules, clustering and hierarchical clustering. Basic techniques that are applicable to many of the areas, such as cross-validation, the bootstrap, dimensionality reduction, and splines, will be explained and used repeatedly. The field is fast evolving and new topics and techniques may be included when necessary. Prereq: PQHS 431.
PQHS 472	Integrated Thinking in Population and Quantitative Health Sciences	2 Units	The determinants of common disease are multifactorial and may involve complex interactions among factors, both known and unknown. These risk factors span domains as diverse as social determinants to biochemical lesions. However, most studies of disease risk usually involve a single class of determinants, defined within a single academic discipline. The goal of this course is to teach students to recognize and define explicit and implicit assumptions about studies of disease and to understand how one may integrate different domains of knowledge to improve our understanding of disease etiology and ultimately prevention and treatment efforts. They will learn to understand assumptions built into conceptual models used to describe and predict disease risk. Prereq: PQHS 431 and PQHS 440 and PQHS 490.
PQHS 473	Integrated Thinking in Population and Quantitative Health Sciences II	2 Units	The determinants of common disease are multifactorial and may involve complex interactions among factors, both known and unknown. These risk factors span domains as diverse as social determinants to biochemical lesions. The goal of this course is to teach students to recognize and define explicit and implicit assumptions about studies of disease and to understand how one may integrate different domains of knowledge to improve our understanding of disease etiology and ultimately prevention and treatment efforts.   This is the second of a two course sequence required of all PhD in Epidemiology and Biostatistics students. PQHS 472 is the first course in the sequence and is a required prerequisite.  This course meets weekly and in-person. Prereq: PQHS 472.
PQHS 480	Introduction to Mathematical Statistics	3 Units	An introduction to statistical inference at an intermediate mathematical level. The concepts of random variables and distributions, discrete and continuous, are reviewed. Topics covered include: expectations, variance, moments, the moment generating function; Bernoulli, binomial, hypergeometric, Poisson, negative binomial, normal, gamma and beta distribution; the central limit theorem; Bayes estimation, maximum likelihood estimators, unbiased estimators, sufficient statistics; sampling distributions (chi-square, t) confidence intervals, Fisher information; hypothesis testing, uniformly most powerful tests and multi-decision problems. Prereq: MATH 122, MATH 124 or MATH 126.
PQHS 481	Theoretical Statistics I	3 Units	Topics provide the background for statistical inference. Random variables; distribution and density functions; transformations, expectation. Common univariate distributions. Multiple random variables; joint, marginal and conditional distributions; hierarchical models, covariance. Distributions of sample quantities, distributions of sums of random variables, distributions of order statistics. Methods of statistical inference. Offered as STAT 345, STAT 445, and PQHS 481. Prereq: MATH 122 or MATH 223 or Coreq: PQHS 431.
PQHS 482	Theoretical Statistics II	3 Units	Point estimation: maximum likelihood, moment estimators.  Methods of evaluating estimators including mean squared error, consistency, "best" unbiased and sufficiency.  Hypothesis testing; likelihood ratio and union-intersection tests.  Properties of tests including power function, bias.  Interval estimation by inversion of test statistics, use of pivotal quantities.  Application to regression.  Graduate students are responsible for mathematical derivations, and full proofs of principal theorems. Offered as STAT 346, STAT 446 and  PQHS 482. Prereq: STAT 345 or STAT 445 or PQHS 481.
PQHS 484	Global Health Epidemiology	1 - 3 Units	This course provides a rigorous problem-centered training in the epidemiology, prevention, treatment, and control of infectious diseases and, more generally, global health.  This is an advanced epidemiology that embraces an active learning environment. Students are expected to invest time out of the classroom  reading and working with classmates. Classes will be conducted with discussions, debates, group projects, and group presentations.  By taking this course, students will develop a framework for interpreting, assessing, and performing epidemiologic research on issues of global importance.  The course will be divided into three modules:1) Global Health Epidemiology  2) Helminth Epidemiology, and 3) Epidemiology of Disease Elimination.  Each module is worth 1 credit hour and may be taken separately.  Each module will have a separate project and/or exam.  The final exam time will be used for group presentations and panel discussion.  Active class participation is required through discussions, case studies, and group projects. Offered as PQHS 484, INTH 484, and MPHP 484.
PQHS 490	Epidemiology: Introduction to Theory and Methods	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to the principles of epidemiology covering the basic methods necessary for population and clinic-based research.  Students will be introduced to epidemiologic study designs, measures of disease occurrence, measures of risk estimation, and casual inference (bias, confounding, and interaction) with application of these principles to specific fields of epidemiology.  Classes will be a combination of lectures, discussion, and in-class exercises.  It is intended for students who have a basic understanding of the principals of human disease and statistics. Offered as PQHS 490 and MPHP 490. Prereq or Coreq: PQHS 431 or Requisites Not Met permission.
PQHS 499	Independent Study	1 - 18 Units	
PQHS 500	Design and Analysis of Observational Studies	3 Units	An observational study investigates treatments, policies or exposures and the effects that they cause, but it differs from an experiment because the investigator cannot control assignment.  We introduce appropriate design, data collection and analysis methods for such studies, to help students design and interpret their own studies, and those of others in their field.  Technical formalities are minimized, and the presentations will focus on the practical application of the ideas.  A course project involves the completion of an observational study, and substantial use of the R statistical software.  Topics include randomized experiments and how they differ from observational studies, planning and design for observational studies, adjustments for overt bias, sensitivity analysis, methods for detecting hidden bias, and focus on propensity score methods for selection bias adjustment, including multivariate matching, stratification, weighting and regression adjustments.  Recommended preparation: a working knowledge of multiple regression, some familiarity with logistic regression, with some exposure to fitting regression models in R. Offered as CRSP 500 and PQHS 500.
PQHS 501	Research Seminar	0 Unit	This seminar series includes faculty and guest-lecturer presentations designed to introduce students to on-going research at the University and elsewhere.  Seminars will emphasize the application of methods learned in class, as well as the introduction of new methods and tools useful in research.
PQHS 502	Introduction to Statistical Consulting	1 Unit	What challenges are faced by a Biostatistician working in a collaborative and consulting environment?  In order to successfully interact with a client, in addition to a solid foundation in statistical methods, the consultant needs to be prepared to deal with issues such as ill-posed research questions, unrealistic expectations on the part of a client, difficulty in understanding the subject of the consultation, thorny ethical issues, and many others.  Courses on statistical consulting are essential components of graduate programs in Statistics. Other courses teach students statistical methods and how to use them to address various problems, but those problems are presented by course instructors who typically have as the goal teaching the appropriate choice and utilization of available statistical tools.  This course prepares students to the challenges involved in 'real life' consulting situations, exposing the students to different encounter types, while honing their communication and statistical skills and raising their awareness of their professional responsibilities.
PQHS 505	Seminar in Global Health Epidemiology	0 Unit	This seminar series examines a broad range of topics related to infectious disease research in international settings.  Areas of interest are certain to include epidemiology, bioethics, medical anthropology, pathogenesis, drug resistance, vector biology, cell and molecular biology, vaccine development, diagnosis, and socio-cultural factors contributing to or compromising effective health care delivery in endemic countries.  Speakers will include a diverse group of regional faculty and post-doctoral trainees, as well as visiting colleagues from around the world.  Students will be asked to read a journal article written by the speaker and then discuss this article with the speaker after their seminar.
PQHS 510	Health Disparities	3 Units	This course aims to provide theoretical and application tools for students from many disciplinary backgrounds to conduct research and develop interventions to reduce health disparities. The course will be situated contextually within the historical record of the United States, reviewing social, political, economic, cultural, legal, and ethical theories related to disparities in general, with a central focus on health disparities. Several frameworks regarding health disparities will be used for investigating and discussing the empirical evidence on disparities among other subgroups (e.g., the poor, women, uninsured, disabled, and non-English speaking populations) will also be included and discussed. Students will be expected to develop a research proposal (observational, clinical, and/or intervention) rooted in their disciplinary background that will incorporate materials from the various perspectives presented throughout the course, with the objective of developing and reinforcing a more comprehensive approach to current practices within their fields.  Offered as CRSP 510, PQHS 510, MPHP 510, NURS 510, and SASS 510.
PQHS 515	Secondary Analysis of Large Health Care Databases	3 Units	Development of skills in working with the large-scale secondary data bases generated for research, health care administration/billing, or other purposes. Students will become familiar with the content, strength, and limitations of several data bases; with the logistics of obtaining access to data bases; the strengths and limitations of routinely collected variables; basic techniques for preparing and analyzing secondary data bases and how to apply the techniques to initiate and complete empirical analysis. Prereq or Coreq: PQHS 431 and (PQHS 490 or MPHP 483).
PQHS 550	Meta-Analysis & Evidence Synthesis	2 - 3 Units	Systematic reviews use reproducible methods to systematically search the literature and synthesize the results of a specific topic area. Meta-analysis is a specific analytic technique used to pool results of individual studies. Systematic reviews are useful ways to establish one's knowledge in a particular field of study, and can highlight gaps in research which can be pursued in future work. They can also inform the background of a grant.   This course is designed to introduce students to the methods of conducting a high quality systematic review and meta-analysis of intervention studies. We will cover the design, methods, and analytic techniques involved in systematic reviews. These concepts will prepare students to conduct their own systematic review or evaluate the systematic reviews of others. Sessions will be lectures, labs, and presentations.    Topics include developing a search strategy, abstracting key data, synthesizing the results qualitatively, meta-analytic techniques, grading the quality of studies, grading the strength of the evidence, and manuscript preparation specific to systematic reviews and meta-analysis of intervention studies.    Caveat: If you would like to conduct a systematic review of your own that can be published after the course ends, you will need to have several other class members or colleagues willing to work with you on the project. The systematic review should be on a topic where you expect no more than 20-30 included studies in order to be able to complete the review soon after the course ends.  Offered as CRSP 550 and PQHS 550. Prereq: CRSP 401, PQHS 431, MPHP 405, NURS 532, or Requisites Not Met permission.
PQHS 601	Master's Project Research	1 - 18 Units	
PQHS 602	Practicum	3 Units	This course focuses on gaining experience as a biostatistician and enhancing the skills needed to become an effective biostatistician, serving as consultant and collaborator. The objectives of this mentored experience course are: to learn the role of the consulting biostatistician and the accompanying responsibilities, experience the life cycle of a project, develop and apply the interpersonal and communications skills required for a biostatistician, strengthen skills learned in the program, and often to enhance the skill set of the student, as well as to gain insight into the life and career of a biostatistician. This experience helps prepare the student for future job interviews and jobs, and may lead directly to a job. The deliverable is a professionally written report in the format of a report to a client or a research paper.
PQHS 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
PQHS 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
PORT 101	Elementary Portuguese I	4 Units	Introductory course.  Students achieve control of the sound system and basic sentence structures of spoken and written Portuguese.  Students use materials offered through the Language Center in addition to class meetings.
PORT 102	Elementary Portuguese II	4 Units	Continuation of PORT 101, emphasizing conversational skills. Prereq: PORT 101 or equivalent.
PORT 201	Intermediate Portuguese I	4 Units	PORT 201 is an intermediate language course.  It assumes a fair knowledge of basic grammar that is reviewed and expanded.  The course needs the student to show a strong determination to engage in conversation in Portuguese, and to commit to develop better writing in Portuguese.  The student learns more about cultural aspects in the Portuguese-speaking world.  The course is taught completely in Portuguese. Prereq: PORT 102 or equivalent.
PORT 399	Independent Study	1 - 3 Units	This course is for students with special interests and commitments that are not addressed in regular courses and who wish to work independently.
MPOD 413	Foundations of Positive Organization Development and Change	3 Units	This course explores and develops the art of reading and understanding social systems in ways that help us imagine, design and develop organization excellence.  First it seeks to show how many of our conventional ideas about organizations are based on discourse and metaphors that lead us to see and understand organizations in partial and often limiting ways.  Growing research from the domains of Positive Psychology and Positive Organization Scholarship and the theory and practice of Appreciative Inquiry will be explored to show how we can create new and more positive, strength-based ways of designing and developing social systems.  Includes presentations, guest lectures and panel discussions on current topics of interest for the Masters in Positive Organization Development and Change (MPOD) candidates.  Led by a faculty member of the Department of Organization Behavior, these dialogues and seminars will be presented in several of the six main residencies of the MPOD program.  Reflective essays and integrative papers will enable participants to explore their practice of OD, leadership capacity, application of learnings from the program and deeply held values related to current issues and opportunities in the domain of human systems change and development. Prereq: Open to MPOD candidates only.
MPOD 413B	Foundations of Positive Organization Development and Change	1 Unit	This course explores and develops the art of reading and understanding social systems in ways that help us imagine, design and develop organization excellence.  First it seeks to show how many of our conventional ideas about organizations are based on discourse and metaphors that lead us to see and understand organizations in partial and often limiting ways.  Growing research from the domains of Positive Psychology and Positive Organization Scholarship and the theory and practice of Appreciative Inquiry will be explored to show how we can create new and more positive, strength-based ways of designing and developing social systems.  Includes presentations, guest lectures and panel discussions on current topics of interest for the Masters in Positive Organization Development and Change (MPOD) candidates.  Led by a faculty member of the Department of Organization Behavior, these dialogues and seminars will be presented in several of the six main residencies of the MPOD program.  Reflective essays and integrative papers will enable participants to explore their practice of OD, leadership capacity, application of learnings from the program and deeply held values related to current issues and opportunities in the domain of human systems change and development. Part Two of Two. Prereq: MPOD 413A.
MPOD 414	Managing Organizational Change and Real-World Challenges	3 Units	The objective of this course is to familiarize participants with the theory and technique of organization design and corporate change with particular emphasis on helping leaders understand and implement the latest forms of organizing in a customer-focused, electronically mediated and knowledge-driven world. Frameworks presented will be used to explore the impact of the information revolution on organization design and change, and the evolution of traditional vertically integrated and multi-divisional enterprises toward spider web structures, trans-organizational networks and communities of practice. Prereq: Open to MPOD candidates only.
MPOD 416A	Leadership, Executive Assessment and Development	2 Units	Leadership with emotional intelligence will be examined by studying a number of topics and applying them to two major case studies: 1) a CEO; and 2) yourself. In this context, coaching the development of leadership will be a major topic throughout the course. This course will explore questions such as: Who are effective leaders? Are they different from effective managers? How do they think and act? What makes us want to follow them? How are leaders developed? What and how can people (you) help/coach others develop their competencies to become more effective leaders? (Part one of a three-section course.) Prereq: Open to MPOD candidates only.
MPOD 416B	Leadership and Executive Assessment and Development	1 Unit	Leadership with emotional intelligence will be examined by studying a number of topics and applying them to two major case studies: 1) a CEO; and 2) yourself. This course will explore questions such as: Who are effective leaders?  Are they different from effective managers?  How do they think and act?  What makes us want to follow them?  How are leaders developed?  What and how can people (you) help others develop their competencies to become more effective leaders? (Part two of three) Prereq: MPOD 416A.
MPOD 416C	Leadership, Executive Assessment and Development	1 Unit	Leadership with emotional intelligence will be examined by studying a number of topics and applying them to two major case studies: 1) a CEO; and 2) yourself. In this context, coaching the development of leadership will be a major topic throughout the course. This course will explore questions such as: Who are effective leaders? Are they different from effective managers? How do they think and act? What makes us want to follow them? How are leaders developed? What and how can people (you) help/coach others develop their competencies to become more effective leaders? (Part three of a three-section course.) Prereq: MPOD 416B.
MPOD 418	Flourishing Enterprise	2 Units	Global issues such as climate change and food security, as well as heightened expectations for personal health and well-being in the workplace, are introducing greater levels of complexity into business strategy and operations, with far-reaching implications for customer satisfaction and employee engagement. Effective handling of these issues can lead to new sources of revenue generation and cost efficiency, as well as reputational value, while failure to do so can lead to financial and competitive risk. Prereq: Open to MPOD candidates only.
MPOD 431	Experiential Learning for Individuals, Teams, and Organizations	3 Units	This course focuses on the theory of experiential learning and its application at the individual, team, and organizational levels of analyses.  This course offers the chance for students to gain insight into their individual learning and adaptive styles, and how such styles impact the way they interact and have consequence for team.  The course also explores how teams and organizations learn, and the effect that cultural determinants have on learning and adaptability.  In addition, the course examines how learning theory can be applied to focused institutional development projects and educational processes.  The course uses presentations, lectures, research findings, interactive activities, and class discussion.  The current topics of interest are for the Masters in Positive Organization and Change (MPOD) candidates.  It is led by a faculty member of the Department of Organization Behavior.  Reflective essays and integrative papers will enable participants to explore their learning styles and that of their organizations and teams to strengthen the practice of OD and human systems change and development. Prereq: MPOD students only.
MPOD 432	Interpersonal Skills Building	3 Units	Interpersonal and team dynamics. It will help you build more open and effective relationships among peers and clients by improving your ability to cooperate with and lead others to work effectively in today's increasingly team-oriented organizations. The emphasis of this course is on learning about oneself in the context of others and using these insights to facilitate learning in the groups you lead. Prereq: Open to MPOD candidates only.
MPOD 432A	Interpersonal Skills Building	1 Unit	The objective of this course is to hone the participant's abilities to use themselves as instruments of change and development in relationships with colleagues and clients.  This requires comfort with and practice in intervening in a broad range of interpersonal and group dynamics, and knowledge of how one's unique personal style and character serve as both strengths and weaknesses in dealing with others in a helping relationship.  Participants will explore theories of adult development, interpersonal and group dynamics, diagnose their interpersonal needs and styles, and practice techniques for developing generative relationships with clients across the OD (organization development) cycle and as process consultants in group settings. Prereq: Open to MPOD candidates only.
MPOD 432B	Interpersonal Skills Building	1 Unit	The objective of this course is to hone the participant's abilities to use themselves as instruments of change and development in relationships with colleagues and clients.  This requires comfort with and practice in intervening in a broad range of interpersonal and group dynamics, and knowledge of how one's unique personal style and character serve as both strengths and weaknesses in dealing with others in a helping relationship.  Participants will explore theories of adult development, interpersonal and group dynamics, diagnose their interpersonal needs and styles, and practice techniques for developing generative relationships with clients across the OD (organization development) cycle and as process consultants in group settings. (Part two of two.) Prereq: Open to MPOD candidates only.
MPOD 435	Practicum in Appreciative Inquiry and Positive OD	3 Units	This course develops participants' consultative skills. Competence in role entry and development, data collection, intervention and evaluation is gained through class exercises and field projects. The focus is on developing a problem-centered approach to intervening in organizations that minimizes reliance on programmed techniques and maximize collaborative innovation and learning between client and consultant. Prereq: Open to MPOD candidates only.
MPOD 439	Individual Field Project	3 Units	The objectives of this course are to: 1) demonstrate the ability to frame and design a clear cut action research project applied to a given organizational development challenge or improvement opportunity; 2) show the ability to engage and mobilize others in a collaborative effort toward a collective outcome; 3) employ a defined change process and use theory from the field of OD (e.g., AI, EI, Sustainability, Organization Design, Strategic Thinking, etc.) to inform practice; 4) evince the ability to sustain momentum during the course of a project, while navigating the complexities that one normally encounters in an effort to complete the action research cycle; 5) provide evidence that theorganization development change project has had a positive benefit or impact; and 6) reveal sufficient self-reflection and mindfulness in ways that further your own and others personal or professional development. These six objectives will fundamentally be the same competencies that I will look for in grading Part 1 and Part 2 of your assignment. Toward these ends, you are expected to plan and execute a significant organization development, and/or change project with an ongoing client or employer. Emphasis is placed on the craft of developing projects that are consistent with one's current skills, career plans, and developmental needs that can be combined with the needs, opportunities, readiness, and resources of the client organization. Prereq: Open to MPOD candidates only.
MPOD 440	Inclusive Leadership	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to help you understand the current theories and effective practices of inclusive leadership, and through this understanding, to help you enhance your own leadership practices and capabilities. We will examine the methods, challenges, trade-offs, and frontiers of inclusive leadership through application of leadership concepts to case studies.  Student teams will identify and conduct an at-a-distance project studying a global executive.  The course will facilitate the development of personal efficacy for working with and supervising diverse others-those from different nations/cultures, races/ethnicities, genders, age groups, religions and lifestyles who may have different values, perspectives, approaches and abilities. As you gain self-awareness of the impact of your own identity, you will clarify your own approaches and styles and become more authentic as a leader and change agent. You will also develop practical knowledge about enabling team cultures of engagement and inclusion. Prereq: Open to MPOD candidates only.
MPOD 440A	Inclusive Leadership in a Global Context	2 Units	The purpose of this course is to help you understand the current theories and effective practices of inclusive leadership in a global context, and through this understanding, to help you enhance your own leadership practices and capabilities. We will examine the methods, challenges, trade-offs, and frontiers of inclusive leadership through application of leadership concepts to case studies.  Student teams will identify and conduct an at-a-distance project studying a global executive.  The course will facilitate the development of personal efficacy for working with and supervising diverse others-those from different nations/cultures, races/ethnicities, genders, age groups, religions and lifestyles who may have different values, perspectives, approaches and abilities. As you gain self-awareness of the impact of your own identity, you will clarify your own approaches and styles and become more authentic as a leader and change agent. You will also develop practical knowledge about enabling team cultures of engagement and inclusion. Part one of two. Prereq: Open to MPOD candidates only.
MPOD 440B	Inclusive Leadership in a Global Context	1 Unit	The purpose of this course is to help you understand the current theories and effective practices of inclusive leadership in a global context, and through this understanding, to help you enhance your own leadership practices and capabilities. We will examine the methods, challenges, trade-offs, and frontiers of inclusive leadership through application of leadership concepts to case studies.  Student teams will identify and conduct an at-a-distance project studying a global executive.  The course will facilitate the development of personal efficacy for working with and supervising diverse others-those from different nations/cultures, races/ethnicities, genders, age groups, religions and lifestyles who may have different values, perspectives, approaches and abilities. As you gain self-awareness of the impact of your own identity, you will clarify your own approaches and styles and become more authentic as a leader and change agent. You will also develop practical knowledge about enabling team cultures of engagement and inclusion. Part two of three. Prereq: Open to MPOD candidates only.
MPOD 470A	Leading Change from a Complexity Perspective	2 Units	In this course, we will continuously attempt to answer two questions: (1) What is the process of sustained, desirable change? and (2) What is the role of a leader?  Concepts from complexity theory will be used, including understanding the multilevel nature of SDC at the individual, dyad, team, organization, community, country, and global levels.  Intentional Change Theory (ICT) will be used as the organizing concept for the changes studied.  In this context, coaching the development of leadership will be a major topic throughout the course. Prereq: MPOD candidates only.
MPOD 470B	Leading Change from a Complexity Perspective	1 Unit	In this course, we will continuously attempt to answer two questions: (1) What is the process of sustained, desirable change? and (2) What is the role of a leader?  Concepts form complexity theory will be used, including understanding the multilevel nature of SDC at the individual, dyad , team, organization, community, country, and global levels.  Intentional Change Theory (ICT) will be used as the organizing concept for the changes studied.  In this context, coaching the development of leadership will be a major topic throughout the course. Prereq: MPOD candidates only.
MPOD 479	Foundations of Strategic Thinking	3 Units	This course will define what constitutes strategic change and what does not. Students will be introduced to a variety of strategic interventions and models from which to interpret, understand and achieve positive organizational change. Opportunity will be provided to apply selected models to the student's organization and other cases in order to gain insight and appreciation for financial and non-financial factors that influence fundamental organizational growth and development. Prereq: Open to MPOD candidates only.
MPOD 480	Dynamics of Effective Change Management Strategies	3 Units	This course will: 1) highlight the major current trends and changes that affect the nature of managerial work; 2) describe how OD practitioners and consultants need to factor such trends into their consulting strategies; 3) differentiate between types of interventions, the circumstances in which they apply and their unique strengths; 4) provide background theories that explain the challenges inherent in mobilizing positive change; 5) describe ways to bridge the gap between knowing and doing in order to build organization resilience; and 6) introduce a variety of consulting techniques and skills that the students can add to their repertoire. Prereq: Open to MPOD candidates only.
MPOD 498	Global Citizenship and Multi-Cultural OD: International Study Tour	3 Units	This course will broaden perspectives and knowledge of how OD principles and technologies are generated and applied in contexts and cultures outside of North America.  Selected literature representing global perspectives on the practice of OD and field experiences will provide support and background for personal experience and reflection on cross-cultural issues in organizing. The primary learning context will be an intense, 10-day study tour to some country outside of North America to provide the participants with opportunities for: 1) comparative studies of OD practices in different cultural settings; 2) in-depth experiences with OD practitioners and students in a different national, regional and cultural context; 3) co-inquiry with non-North American students also involved in developing OD knowledge and skills; and 4) on-site organization visits outside of North America to observe and learn about on-going dynamic change efforts. Prereq: Open to MPOD candidates only.
EPOM 400	Leadership and Interpersonal Skills	3 Units	This course is designed as an experience based process to increase understanding of Communication, Emotional Intelligence and behavioral based communication needs in the work environment.  To increase understanding, students will learn to recognize, manage and leverage these in business relationships as well as in team and group processes to develop effective Leadership style. Students will work in teams to examine the topics from the perspective of team members and leaders and will formulate strategies to reach desired goals or outcomes.
EPOM 401	Introduction to Business for Engineers	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to the business environment for practicing engineers. The course emphasizes the interplay between business and engineering in the context of the competitive marketplace (economics), how engineering proposals are evaluated (finance), the relationship between product and customer (marketing), making effective use of micro-disciplinary teams (organizational behavior), and the manufacturing and production process (operations).
EPOM 403	Product and Process Design and Implementation	3 Units	The course is taught through a series of lectures, class discussions, group projects and case studies.  The course aim is to provide a solid understanding of the many aspects of the engineering design process and the management of technology.  The course focuses on the engineering and management activities used to develop and bring to market new products and processes.  The first part of the course focuses on the techniques used to develop new ideas, the second part focuses on the management of technology and innovation. Recommended preparation: EPOM 401.
EPOM 405	Applied Engineering Statistics	3 Units	In this course a combination of lectures, demonstrations, case studies, and individual and group computer problems provides an intensive introduction to fundamental concepts, applications and the practice of contemporary engineering statistics.  Each topic is introduced through realistic sample problems to be solved first by using standard spreadsheet programs and then using more sophisticated software packages.  Primary attention is given to teaching the fundamental concepts underlying standard analysis methods. Offered as EPOM 405 and ECSE 411.
EPOM 407	Engineering Economics and Financial Analysis	3 Units	In this course, money and profit as measures of "goodness" in engineering design are studied.  Methods for economic analysis of capital investments are developed and the financial evaluation of machinery, manufacturing processes, buildings, R&D, personnel development, and other long-lived investments is emphasized.  Optimization methods and decision analysis techniques are examined to identify economically attractive alternatives.  Basic concepts of cost accounting are also covered.  Topics include: economics criteria for comparing projects: present worth, annual worth analysis; depreciation and taxation; retirement and replacement; effect of inflation and escalation on economic evaluations; case studies; use of optimization methods to evaluate many alternatives; decision analysis; accounting fundamentals: income and balance sheets; cost accounting. Offered as ECSE 407 and EPOM 407.
EPOM 409	Master of Engineering Capstone Project	3 Units	This is the capstone course for the Master of Engineering Program providing students with the opportunity to integrate the Program's topics through an intensive case study project. Interdisciplinary teams are assigned a major engineering project that covers the stages from design concept through development to final manufacture, including business and engineering decision making to maximize market penetration.  Topics also include safety, environmental issues, ethics, intellectual property, product liability and societal issues. Recommended preparation: EPOM 401, EPOM 403, EPOM 405, and EPOM 407.
EPOM 410	Intellectual Property Management and Opportunity Assessment	3 Units	The goal of this course is to address issues relating to the commercialization of scientific inventions by exposing graduate students to the challenges and opportunities encountered when attempting to develop meaningful intellectual property from the point of early discovery to the clinic and market.  Specifically, this course seeks to provide students with the ability to value a given technological advance or invention holistically, focusing on issues that extend beyond scientific efficacy and include patient and practitioner value propositions, legal and intellectual property protection, business modeling, potential market impacts, market competition, and ethical, social, and healthcare practitioner acceptance.  These issues transcend disciplinary boundaries, requiring the integration of expertise in the fields of law, business, and biomedical research disciplines.   For instance, comprehending the intricacies involved in the evolution of an upstream product from the lab to the marketplace requires an understanding of intellectual property management, namely the identification of optimal appropriability mechanisms, constructing an intellectual property portfolio (e.g., patents, trademarks, and trade secrets), and leveraging this portfolio in a competitive fashion. An emphasis of this course is to help students understand that intellectual property strategy is business strategy, and that IP is a strategic business asset that can be leveraged to create value and intellectual asset formation in the marketplace.
EPOM 411	Innovation - the Confluence of Need, Requirements and Creativity	3 Units	Innovation - the Confluence of Need, Requirements and Creativity:  The Purpose of this course is to familiarize students with tools and methods of facilitation necessary to move from a simple idea, to a validated development concept with commercial potential.  Drawing from fundamentals of a range of programs, including Stanford's BioDesign, Lean Launch, Requirements by Design and others, the course will lead students through the process of developing detailed perspectives on unmet need, validated design requirements, intellectual property analysis and commercialization fundamentals.
EPOM 412	Technology Transfer and Collaboration	3 Units	The overall goal of this course is to address the process of technology transfer. The course will build on an understanding of IP Management and Commercialization activities that follow a new discovery, and examine specific approaches to commercializing technology through the process of technology transfer both in the context of academic research and industry research and development. An overview of the drivers governing relevant industry standards will be discussed, along with specific tools that include sponsored research, licensing, and startup formation. The course will include hands-on assessments of two case studies that present applications of law and policy in the context of collaborative technology development, where each student team will provide a critique and overview of how they would handle the circumstances of the given case. Prereq: EPOM 410.
EPOM 413	Innovation, Strategy & Leadership: Contemporary Approach to Future Growth	3 Units	The overall goal of this course is to address the process of innovating in an enterprise context. Outside of the enterprise, global shifts, economic developments and technological evolutions all present opportunities and challenges for innovation-based organizations. Inside the enterprise, company culture, acceptable risk/reward profiles and strategic mindsets will all influence the effectiveness of valuable innovation.   Building on an understanding of IP Management and Commercialization activities that follow a new discovery (see, e.g., EPOM 410), and needs-based innovation and design (see, e.g., EPOM 411) this course examines specific approaches and factors related to effectively responding to the challenge of innovation from strategic and leadership perspectives.   This course will examine approaches to strategic leadership relative to innovative challenges, building an understanding of successful endeavors, flops that "should have worked" and an embrace of the myriad choices and factors that underlie competitive innovation.   The course is three credit hours. During the semester, students will work individually, focusing on issues of the process of structuring innovation, applying tools and methodologies presented during the course. Course leaders and presenters will be drawn from across the university and industry.   Analytical and philosophical understanding will be enhanced by hands-on assessments of two case studies that present applications of law and policy in the context of strategic technology innovation and leadership. The goal of each student team is to provide a critique and overview of what factors drove the circumstances and outcomes of the given case. The ultimate objective is to deliver a working understanding the strategic options available when attempting to lead an innovative enterprise through the process of converting innovative potential to strategically competitive solution.
PRAC 1	Practicum I	0 Unit	A practicum is a workplace experience, the primary goal of which is the intellectual, personal and professional growth of the student.  It occurs under the supervision of a mentor in the workplace who is committed to seeing that it is an educational experience as well as a work venture.  It requires skills appropriate to the student's year in college and provides the student with new skill, insights and experiences that are transferable back to the academic setting and/or a future position in the workplace.  May include requirements preparatory to undertaking the workplace assignment as well as a final project to be completed by the end of the semester is which the workplace experience occurs. Prereq: Junior Standing (completion of 60 hours).
PRAC 10	PT Practicum	0 Unit	A practicum is a workplace experience, the primary goal which is the intellectual, personal, and professional growth of the student. It occurs under the supervision of a mentor in the workplace who is committed to seeing that it is an educational experience as well as a work venture. It requires skills appropriate to the student's year in college and provides the student with new skill, insights, and experiences that are transferable back to the academic setting and/or future position in the workplace. May include requirements preparatory to undertaking the workplace assignment as well as a final project to be completed by the end of the semester in which the workplace experience occurs. Recommended Preparation: Completion of two semesters of coursework at CWRU.
PRAC 11	Part Time Practicum Program - Specialized Programs	0 Unit	A practicum is a workplace experience, the primary goal of which is the intellectual, personal, and professional growth of the student. It occurs under the supervision of a mentor in the workplace who is committed to seeing that it is an educational experience as well as a work venture. It requires skills appropriate to the student's year in college and provides the student with new skills, insights, and experiences that are transferable back to the academic setting and/or future position in the workplace. May include requirements preparatory to undertaking the workplace assignment as well as a final project to be completed by the end of the semester in which the workplace experience occurs.  The specialized programs practicum course is specifically designed for students enrolling in practicum as a specialized program through the career center or their academic department. Recommended Preparation: Completion of two semesters of coursework at CWRU.
PRAC 2	Practicum II	0 Unit	A practicum is a workplace experience, the primary goal of which is the intellectual, personal and professional growth of the student.  It occurs under the supervision of a mentor in the workplace who is committed to seeing that it is an educational experience as well as a work venture.  It requires skills appropriate to the student's year in college and provides the student with new skill, insights and experiences that are transferable back to the academic setting and/or a future position in the workplace.  May include requirements preparatory to undertaking the workplace assignment as well as a final project to be completed by the end of the semester in which the workplace experience occurs.  Must have at least one intervening semester in residence after PRAC 001. Prereq: Junior standing.
PRAC 3	Practicum III	0 Unit	A practicum is a workplace experience, the primary goal of which is the intellectual, personal and professional growth of the student.  It occurs under the supervision of a mentor in the workplace who is committed to seeing that it is an educational experience as well as a work venture.  It requires skills appropriate to the student's year in college and provides the student with new skill, insights and experiences that are transferable back to the academic setting and/or a future position in the workplace.  May include requirements preparatory to undertaking the workplace assignment as well as a final project to be completed by the end of the semester is which the workplace experience occurs. Prereq: Junior Standing (completion of 60 hours).
PRAC 4	Practicum - Specialized Programs	0 Unit	A practicum is a workplace experience, the primary goal of which is the intellectual, personal and professional growth of the student.  It occurs under the supervision of a mentor in the workplace who is committed to seeing that it is an educational experience as well as a work venture.  It requires skills appropriate to the student's year in college and provides the student with new skill, insights and experiences that are transferable back to the academic setting and/or a future position in the workplace.  May include requirements preparatory to undertaking the workplace assignment as well as a final project to be completed by the end of the semester is which the workplace experience occurs. The specialized programs practicum course is specifically designed for students enrolling in practicum as a part of a specialized program through the career center or their academic department. Prereq: Junior Standing (completion of 60 hours).
PSCL 101	General Psychology I	3 Units	Methods, research, and theories of psychology. Basic research from such areas as psychophysiology, sensation, perception, development, memory, learning, psychopathology, and social psychology.
PSCL 102	General Psychology II	3 Units	The applications of psychological research in normal problems of adjustment. Topics include: coping with anxiety, romance and marriage, and interpersonal behavior.
PSCL 230	Child Psychology	3 Units	Basic facts and principles of psychological development from the prenatal period through adolescence. Recommended preparation: PSCL 101.
PSCL 282	Quantitative Methods in Psychology	3 Units	The theory and application of basic methods used in the analysis of psychological data.  Not available for credit to students who have completed STAT 201 or ANTH 319. Counts for CAS Quantitative Reasoning Requirement.
PSCL 313	Psychology of Personality	3 Units	The development and organization of personality; theories of personality and methods for assessing the person; problems of personal adjustment.
PSCL 315	Social Psychology	3 Units	Empirical studies of typical human responses to situations. First impressions, attitude change, effects of cash incentives, behavior in emergencies, interpersonal attraction, impression management, crowding, stress, vices. Recommended preparation: PSCL 101.
PSCL 317	Health Psychology	3 Units	Examines psychological processes that affect physical health. Covers the physiological factors affecting the immune system, chronic physical disorders, pain, compliance with prescribed medical treatments, the effects of stress and coping, the effects of the patient-physician interaction, and the psychological aspects of the hospital and the health care systems. Recommended preparation : PSCL 101.
PSCL 321	Abnormal Psychology	3 Units	Major syndromes of mental disorders, their principal symptoms, dynamics, etiology, and treatment. Recommended preparation: PSCL 101.
PSCL 323	Consumer Psychology	3 Units	Examines psychological processes that affect buyer behaviors. Covers the basic psychological processes of purchasing behavior, marketing choices that influence consumer behaviors, and post-purchase behaviors such as brand loyalty. Explores behavior across a number of domains, including motivation, attention, persuasion, comprehension, automatic decision making, and biases. Recommended preparation: PSCL 101.
PSCL 325	Psychotherapy and Personality Change	3 Units	Three methods of psychotherapy (behavioral, psychoanalytic, and client-centered) are discussed. The therapy techniques and the manner by which personality change is effected are examined. Recommended preparation: PSCL 101.
PSCL 329	Adolescence	3 Units	Psychological perspectives on physical, cognitive, and social development. Recommended preparation: PSCL 101.
PSCL 333	Early Intervention I: Theories and Practice	3 Units	This course describes the characteristics of young children (aged between 0 to 5 years) with disabilities and examines the intervention models and practices that are used to address the developmental and social emotional needs of these children. The course covers the legislative and philosophical foundations for contemporary early intervention practice. It discusses the meaning of evidence-based practice and examines contemporary early intervention practices from this perspective. The readings and assignments for this course have been designed to reflect the course objectives. Offered as PSCL 333 and PSCL 434.
PSCL 334C	Seminar and Practicum: Hospitalized Children	3 Units	Supervised field placement and attendance at staff conferences in various child and adolescent settings. Regular seminar meetings. Prereq: PSCL 230.
PSCL 335C	Seminar and Practicum: Hospitalized Child	3 Units	Supervised field placement and attendance at staff conferences in various child and adolescent settings. Regular seminar meetings. Prereq: PSCL 230 and Junior or Senior Status.
PSCL 336	Introduction to Applied Behavior Analysis	3 Units	This course examines the basic principles and concepts of applied behavior analysis as used to improve socially important behavior problems. Behavioral measurement procedures, single-subject designs, interpretation of single-subject data, and ethical considerations will be discussed. Offered as PSCL 336 and PSCL 436.
PSCL 338	Seminar and Practicum in Adolescents	3 Units	Supervised field placement and attendance in early childhood, child and adolescent settings including preschools, schools, hospitals, and neighborhood centers.  This course is an elective.  Recommended preparation: PSCL 101.   Offered as EDUC 338, PSCL 338 and SOCI 338.
PSCL 344	Developmental Psychopathology	3 Units	This course will focus on the interplay of biological, psychological, familial, and social determinants of disorders ranging from autism to delinquency and bulimia. Recommended preparation: PSCL 230 or PSCL 321.
PSCL 350	Behavior Genetics	3 Units	Examines the impact of both nature and nurture on human behavior. Basic quantitative genetic methodology will be covered. Current family, twin and adoption studies in the areas of personality, intelligence, alcoholism, criminality, and psychopathology will be reviewed. Recommended preparation: PSCL 101. Offered as PSCL 350 and PSCL 450.
PSCL 352	Physiological Psychology	3 Units	This course is designed to teach the fundamentals of neural communication and central nervous system structure.  Special attention is placed on common neurological illnesses and their psychopharmacological treatments.  Neural systems underlying sensory/perceptual, motor, and higher-order cognitive processes are also explored. Offered as PSCL 352 and PSCL 403. Prereq: PSCL 101.
PSCL 353	Psychology of Learning	3 Units	The basic methods in the study of learning. The major theories proposed to account for the learning process. Development of the fundamental concepts and principles governing the learning process in both humans and lower animal. Recommended preparation: PSCL 101.
PSCL 357	Cognitive Psychology	3 Units	How individuals encode, store, organize, and use information. Pattern recognition, attention, memory, and problem solving. Recommended preparation: PSCL 101.
PSCL 365	Psychology of Religion and Spirituality	3 Units	This course is designed to provide an undergraduate-level overview of the psychology of religion and spirituality. It will emphasize both theory and research in this topic area. Following the order outlined in the text for the course, we will cover religion/spirituality "from the inside out," beginning with biological aspects of r/s and working outward, all the way up to social aspects of r/s.   The course will be primarily lecture- and textbook-based but will also include both large-group and small-group discussion. Grading will be based on three exams (with the lowest score dropped), a required final exam, and a variety of assignments.  A major aim of the course is to encourage students to apply ideas from the course to their lives; however, because some issues raised in the class might be very personal and/or controversial, the class will not require personal sharing about r/s beliefs (in either discussion or written form). In designing the assignments, care has been taken to provide a menu of options that vary in terms of length/complexity and emphasis on personal experience vs. more abstract reflection. Prereq: PSCL 101.
PSCL 369	Adult Development and Aging	3 Units	An overview of concepts and research relating to adult development and aging. The lifespan perspective will be used in examining major developmental paradigms. Personality and cognitive lines of development will be traced across the lifespan. Data from both longitudinal and cross-sectional studies will be analyzed. Both normal and pathological aging will be discussed. Special emphasis will be given to areas of cognitive deterioration in aging. Implications for optimal adult development and aging will also be discussed.
PSCL 375	Research Design and Analysis	3 Units	Conceptual and methodological issues confronted by the behavioral scientist conducting research.  Major experimental designs and statistical procedures.  Intuitive understanding of the mathematical operations. Majors planning to apply to graduate school in Psychology are strongly encouraged to complete this course. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: PSCL 101 and (PSCL 282 or ANTH 319 or STAT 201 or STAT 201R).
PSCL 379	Neurodevelopmental Disabilities	3 Units	Ways in which neurobehavioral development can go awry, the causes of such deviations, and their consequences.  The course builds on basic psychological and neuroscience concepts to explore the manner in which developmental disabilities occur, ways of preventing disabilities, and approaches to ameliorating and managing disabling conditions. Recommended preparation: PSCL 101 and PSCL 230.  Offered as PSCL 379 and PSCL 479.
PSCL 381	Social Factors in the Development of Psychopathology	3 Units	Environmental risk factors for psychopathology are numerous; specific social factors, such as bullying, peer pressure, and social adversity are often linked with the development of psychiatric disorders. Which begs the questions: Can Facebook cause depression? Do television shows like 13 Reasons Why increase the rate of suicide? Are "fitspiration" communities dangerous? This course will review the role social factors (social support, social interactions, social functioning, and the broader social context of communities) relate to the development and maintenance of psychopathology on biological and behavioral levels. In the context of disorders such as autism, schizophrenia, depression (including suicide), eating disorders, and post-traumatic stress disorder, this course will look at how social factors might contribute to the development of mental illness, as well as how social factors might be indicators of mental illness, and finally how social factors might mediate the severity of or even prevent the development of mental illness. Prereq: PSCL 101 and PSCL 321.
PSCL 382	Pseudoscience in Mental Health	3 Units	Have you ever wondered whether polygraphs (lie detectors) are valid assessments? Or why inkblots are thought to be useful tests for psychopathology? Or if multiple personality disorder actually exists? And if these ideas are misconstrued or false, why do so many people believe them? This course focuses on distinguishing pseudoscientific claims from scientific claims in clinical psychology. We will evaluate popular, and oftentimes controversial, methods, assessments, and treatments within the field of clinical science. Grounded in the fundamentals of scientific inquiry and research methods, students will sharpen critical thinking skills by evaluating pseudoscientific claims and learning to identify the characteristic features that distinguish pseudoscience and science. We will discuss the psychological issues associated with theories and practices such as false memories, projective testing, facilitated communication, the use of expert testimony, dissociative identity disorder, and harmful or unsupported treatments for psychiatric disorders. Additionally students will complete a semester long research project associated with pseudoscience in mental health. In groups, students will design and run their own experiments and present these data at the end of the semester. Prereq: PSCL 282.
PSCL 385	Science of Emotion and Aging	3 Units	In this course we will examine the multi-faceted nature of emotion with an emphasis on the development of emotion in adulthood.  We will consider the history, theories, and most recent research and thinking in the science of emotion and aging. We will also be considering how we know what we know about emotions. So, one goal will be to increase our awareness of the assumptions underlying theorists, claims, researchers, findings, and our own belief structures. We will also work to strengthen our general thinking and communicative abilities as we study the psychology of emotion.  Specifically, our goals will be to state theories and ideas clearly and concisely, to identify different parts of arguments and analyze the logic of these parts, to integrate the different aspects of emotion, and to generate new ideas based on the theories and research.  My shorthand terms for these processes are: "summarizing", "analyzing", "integrating", and "generating".
PSCL 387	Psychology Capstone Seminar: Genocide and Mass Atrocities	3 Units	Human cruelty, ethnopolitical conflict, war, terrorism, and genocide continues presently to create destruction and suffering throughout the world.  Psychology has an important role in contributing to an understanding of individual or group characteristics, and specific circumstances and psychological processes that lead individuals and groups to commit either acts of destruction or acts of goodness.  This course will provide an overview of the psychological literature on genocide, mass atrocities and violence. Most people are aware of the Holocaust and less so regarding other past genocides. We will examine and discuss past genocides (e.g. the Holocaust and Rwanda among others) as well as present genocides and mass violence (e.g. Darfur, the mass killings of Yezidis, and other examples of violence, torture, and the mistreatment of human beings). The path from prejudice and hatred to mass violence will be explored. We will address rescuing behaviors and resistance during genocide and mass atrocities, as well as the impact of bystander behavior on human violence.  In addition, we will explore how people can heal from the trauma of past victimization and the role of psychologists in this undertaking.  Another important topic to be examined focuses on how an identity can be formed when one is a descendant of a genocide/mass atrocity survivor or perpetrator. We will also address how the past is remembered or forgotten. This course is a reading and writing intensive course. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: PSCL 101 and at least 15 credit hours previously completed in PSCL.
PSCL 388	Human Sexual Behavior	3 Units	Sex is approached as a form of personal and interpersonal behavior.  A broad range of theories from social psychology will be used to explain human sexual behavior, and these will be evaluated by using facts and findings from recent research studies.  Topics include sexual relationships, gender differences, promiscuity, rape and coercion, finding and choosing sex partners, sexual risk-taking, harassment, sexual identity and orientation, cultural influences and differences, evolution of sexual motivations, prostitution, pornography, and love. Prereq: PSCL 101 and PSCL 315.
PSCL 389	Emotion and Emotion Regulation	3 Units	This course will focus on academic research associated with emotional processes and emotion regulation.  Specifically, we will answer questions like: What are emotions, and why are they important?  How are emotions communicated, and how do researchers measure them?  How do emotions influence one's thinking ability, and visa-versa?  What is emotion regulation?  How do people differ in terms of their overall happiness and well-being, the degree to which they seek/avoid positive/negative experiences, and how they try to control their emotions?  And what brain mechanisms are involved in emotional processing and emotion regulation?  This course is also intended to help students read research in a thorough, critical manner, which may have a positive impact on students considering an academic career. Prereq: PSCL 101 and PSCL 352.
PSCL 390	Seminars in Psychology	1 - 3 Units	Surveys of special subject areas. Topics vary in response to faculty and student interests. Small group discussion. Prerequisite depends on content.
PSCL 392	Capstone: Positive Psychology and Character Strengths	3 Units	This seminar-based course is designed to provide a senior capstone experience in the area of positive psychology and character strengths.  Students will focus on one specific character strength or positive psychology concept for the class project.  The project will include a literature review and critique as well as a self-reflective component.  Students will present their projects in two formats: a classroom-based lecture presentation and a literature review (15-20 pages).  Class periods will include a blend of lecture, discussion, and student presentations.  All students will be assigned to small groups for classroom-based discussions.  Assignments are designed to help students develop their projects and will focus on self-reflection, literature review skills, and effective strategies for writing, presenting, and evaluating the work of others. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: Students must be seniors.
PSCL 394	Psychology Capstone Seminar: Current Problems	3 Units	This seminar course will revolve around the identification and critical examination of current problems in society.  Insights gained from psychological research will be applied to better understand these problems.  Successful completion of the course will require critical analysis of published research, integration of information from different areas of psychology and from different disciplines, an oral presentation, and a final written research report including a literature review. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: PSCL 375.
PSCL 395	Capstone and Honors Program	3 Units	Supervision in carrying out an independent research study in the student's area of interest. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: PSCL 375.
PSCL 396	Capstone: Anxiety and Depression: Symptoms, Etiology, and Treatment	3 Units	Satisfies SAGES Capstone requirement: A research-based and writing-intensive presentation of current knowledge regarding the symptoms, etiology, and treatment of anxiety disorders and mood disorders. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: PSCL 101 and PSCL 375.
PSCL 397	Independent Study	1 - 3 Units	Individual study involving specific programs of reading, research, and special projects. Prereq: PSCL 101.
PSCL 398C	Child Policy Externship and Capstone	3 Units	Externships offered through CHST/ANTH/PSCL 398C give students an opportunity to work directly with professionals who design and implement policies that impact the lives of children and their families. Agencies involved are active in areas such as public health, including behavioral health, education, juvenile justice, childcare and/or child welfare.  Students apply for the externships, and selected students are placed in local public or nonprofit agencies with a policy focus. Each student develops an individualized learning plan in consultation with the Childhood Studies Program faculty and the supervisor in the agency.  Offered as CHST 398C, ANTH 398C, and PSCL 398C. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: CHST 301.
PSCL 399	Evaluating Psychological Information	3 Units	This course is a capstone designed to encourage advanced psychology students to review the knowledge they have gained throughout their coursework and to evaluate new information using this knowledge. While many core classes focus on learning the foundations of psychology through textbook readings and lectures, this class is a seminar that focuses on engaged and active participation in discussions and assignments during class. Class work will focus on evaluating psychological research, considering psychology as a field of scientific inquiry, understanding misconceptions about psychology and psychological findings, and exercising critical thinking skills. The course will culminate for each student in a unique SAGES capstone project, including a final written report and a public presentation. Independent work outside of the classroom will focus mostly on the capstone project, though you will also complete some class readings and reflection papers. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: PSCL 375.
PSCL 402	Cognition and Information Processing	3 Units	Aspects of cognition beyond the area of sensation and perception, involving symbolic processes, especially problems of meaning, conceiving, reasoning, judging, and thinking.
PSCL 403	Physiological Psychology	3 Units	This course is designed to teach the fundamentals of neural communication and central nervous system structure.  Special attention is placed on common neurological illnesses and their psychopharmacological treatments.  Neural systems underlying sensory/perceptual, motor, and higher-order cognitive processes are also explored. Offered as PSCL 352 and PSCL 403. Prereq: Graduate Standing or Requisites Not Met permission.
PSCL 404	Learning Theory	3 Units	The research literature in learning; theoretical formulations of contemporary learning theorists. Limited to graduate students.
PSCL 407	Research Design and Quantitative Analysis I	3 Units	Intermediate research design and statistical analysis used in psychological research. Statistical inference from single variables, elementary principles of probability, correlation and regression. Recommended preparation: PSCL 282.
PSCL 408	Research Design and Quantitative Analysis II	3 Units	Advanced research design and statistical analysis used in psychological research. Statistical inference from multiple variables, multiple correlation and regression, analysis of variance, nonparametric statistics. Recommended preparation: PSCL 407.
PSCL 409	Advanced Social Psychology	3 Units	This seminar-based course provides a broad, graduate-level overview of the field of social psychology.  The course draws on theory and basic research in social and personality psychology to teach basic principles of human nature that can be applied to daily life, research, and clinical/applied work.  Major topic areas include the self (e.g., self-regulation; self-evaluation), social cognition and relationships (e.g., social comparison; transgression), and group processes (e.g., social influence; prejudice).  The interface between social and personality psychology will also receive attention.
PSCL 410	Developmental Psychology	3 Units	The research literature and theoretical formulation in the area of developmental psychology. Limited to graduate students.
PSCL 412	Measurement of Behavior	3 Units	Theory and methods of human behavior measurements. Reliability, validity, and test construction in the objective assessments of traits and abilities. Recommended preparation: PSCL 282.
PSCL 417	Clinical Neuroscience	3 Units	This course focuses on the neurobiology of psychiatric disorders. The goal of this course is to better understand the biological factors that occur in the presence of a mind or brain disorder. In this course we will cover disorders such as schizophrenia, depression, bipolar disorder, substance use disorders, and anxiety disorders, as well as neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g. autism spectrum disorders).
PSCL 418	History and Systems	3 Units	Historical antecedents of modern psychology.
PSCL 424	Clinical Interviewing	3 Units	Introduction to diagnostic and therapeutic interviewing.
PSCL 425	Methods of Assessment I	3 Units	Limited to graduate students in clinical psychology. Recommended preparation: Graduate standing in psychology with department permission.
PSCL 426	Methods of Assessment II	3 Units	Methods of psychological assessment, emphasizing personality and family function in childhood and adulthood. Recommended preparation: Limited to Grad students in Clinical Psychology.  Requires approval of the Director of Clinical Training.
PSCL 429	Practicum in Assessment I	1 Unit	Applied experience for clinical psychology graduate students in the cognitive assessment of children and adults. Recommended preparation: Concurrent enrollment in PSCL 425.
PSCL 430	Practicum in Assessment II	1 Unit	Recommended preparation: Approval of the Director of Clinical Training or concurrent enrollment in PSCL 426.
PSCL 431	Supervised Field Placement Year 2	0 Unit	Supervised training in clinical psychology in agency, hospital, or university settings. Required in Fall and Spring terms of all second year students in the clinical psychology training program. Recommended preparation: PSCL 425, PSCL 426.
PSCL 432A	Early Intervention Graduate Practicum A: Foundations for Interpersonal Communication	1 Unit	This course is set up to provide students with information and practice in collaborative professional skills that are necessary for professional competence in a multidisciplinary world. Skill development will include inter-professional education (IPE) where students will take part in a CWRU-wide course and with students participating from a variety of disciplines (e.g., nursing, speech-language pathology, etc.). Students will develop attitudes and skills related to:  1. Promoting inter-professional practice and mutual respect 2. Inter-professional teamwork and communication 3. Understanding the roles and responsibilities of various individuals in early intervention.
PSCL 432B	Early Intervention Graduate Practicum B: School Practicum and Foundations for IPC	1 Unit	This course is part of a series of courses intended to offer students practical experience in the field of early intervention. As part of this course, students will be placed in a school setting and will gain professional experience related to working with young children and their families under professional supervision. This course is set up to provide students with information about, practice in, in addition to development and professional skills that are necessary towards achieving professional competence when with working with young children and families.
PSCL 432C	Early Intervention Graduate Practicum C: Medical Placement	0 - 2 Units	This course is part of a series of courses intended to offer students practical experience in the field of early intervention. Students will be placed in a medical setting where they will gain professional experience related to working with young children and their families under professional supervision.  This course is set up to provide students with information about, practice in, in addition to development and professional skills that are necessary towards achieving professional competence when with working with young children and families.
PSCL 432D	Early Intervention Graduate Practicum D: Choice	1 Unit	This course is part of a series of courses intended to offer students practical experience in the field of early intervention. This course is the fourth in its series. At this point, students are allowed to choose their placement (e.g., medical, school). Students will gain further professional experience related to working with young children and their families under professional supervision in their placement of choice.  This course is set up to provide students with information about, practice in, in addition to development and professional skills that are necessary towards achieving professional competence when with working with young children and families.
PSCL 433	Early Intervention Child Psychology: Infant and Toddler Development	2 Units	This course is an introductory graduate seminar on child development in the context of psychology, communication science, and social work.  Mastery of the theoretical and empirical literature of developmental psychology is critical to the practice of effective social workers and speech language pathologists.   Course Objectives:  You will gain an appreciation for human development with a focus on the infancy period to adolescence. You will recognize milestones (behavioral, cognitive, physical) throughout the different stages of child development.  You will learn about modern and classical psychological theory and gain an appreciation that these various theories all contribute uniquely and invaluably to our understanding of child development. You will learn about prominent research findings as well as research methods unique to the area of developmental psychology. You will be able to demonstrate mastery of the developmental literature and apply it to authentic performance/practice in your chosen field.
PSCL 434	Early Intervention I: Theories and Practice	3 Units	This course describes the characteristics of young children (aged between 0 to 5 years) with disabilities and examines the intervention models and practices that are used to address the developmental and social emotional needs of these children. The course covers the legislative and philosophical foundations for contemporary early intervention practice. It discusses the meaning of evidence-based practice and examines contemporary early intervention practices from this perspective. The readings and assignments for this course have been designed to reflect the course objectives. Offered as PSCL 333 and PSCL 434.
PSCL 435	Early Intervention II: Evidence Based Practice	2 Units	This course is designed to cover evidence-based early intervention practices when working with young children aged between 0 to 6 years of age. The course covers recent evidence-based practices for contemporary early intervention practice. It discusses the meaning of evidence-based practice and the readings and assignments for this course have been designed to reflect the course objectives. Prereq: PSCL 434.
PSCL 436	Introduction to Applied Behavior Analysis	3 Units	This course examines the basic principles and concepts of applied behavior analysis as used to improve socially important behavior problems. Behavioral measurement procedures, single-subject designs, interpretation of single-subject data, and ethical considerations will be discussed. Offered as PSCL 336 and PSCL 436. Prereq: PSCL 434.
PSCL 444	Developmental Psychopathology	3 Units	This course will focus on the interplay of biological, psychological, familial, and social determinants of disorders ranging from autism to delinquency and bulimia.
PSCL 450	Behavior Genetics	3 Units	Examines the impact of both nature and nurture on human behavior. Basic quantitative genetic methodology will be covered. Current family, twin and adoption studies in the areas of personality, intelligence, alcoholism, criminality, and psychopathology will be reviewed. Recommended preparation: PSCL 101. Offered as PSCL 350 and PSCL 450.
PSCL 451	Special Topics in Psychology	1 Unit	These 1 credit mini-courses should provide enjoyable opportunities for students to explore interesting material related to clinical psychology that has not been covered in other required courses. A primary goal is to stimulate interest and discussion in the area. Thus, students will not be expected to write term papers or take any exams. In terms of background reading, students should be provided with roughly one journal article per hour of class meeting. The course is graded pass/no pass, and grading will be based on class attendance and class participation.
PSCL 453	Seminars in Psychology	1 - 3 Units	A special problem or topic. Content varies with student and faculty interest. Recent offerings: creative thinking in research, community psychological, evaluation of community processes, experimental and computer methods, consultation, and psychoanalytic ego psychology.
PSCL 479	Neurodevelopmental Disabilities	3 Units	Ways in which neurobehavioral development can go awry, the causes of such deviations, and their consequences.  The course builds on basic psychological and neuroscience concepts to explore the manner in which developmental disabilities occur, ways of preventing disabilities, and approaches to ameliorating and managing disabling conditions. Recommended preparation: PSCL 101 and PSCL 230.  Offered as PSCL 379 and PSCL 479.
PSCL 497	Graduate Independent Study	1 - 9 Units	Independent research and reading programs with individual members of the faculty.
PSCL 501	Seminar in Health Psychology: Clinical Practice and Research Principles	1 - 3 Units	Seminar in Health Psychology: Clinical Practice & Research Principles is a one-credit seminar course intended for clinical psychology graduate students in the CWRU Department of Psychological Sciences and other related graduate programs in addition to upper-level undergraduates in related fields with the permission of the course instructors. This course is designed to provide students with exposure to psychologists at academic medical centers or universities in Northeast Ohio and across the U.S. regarding clinical practice and research as it pertains to the field of health psychology. It is intended for students with interests in either child or adult clinical psychology, including those with early childhood interests to those with a focus on geriatric clinical practice/research. This course is offered one semester/year, and the content and speakers rotate annually so students may enroll multiple times in consultation with their academic advisors.  The clinical practice class sessions will include one or more case examples presented by each guest speaker (or by the course instructors), followed by class discussions of conceptualization and intervention strategies and integration of how psychologists with a health psychology specialty collaborate and consult with multiple other specialists.  The research principles class sessions will include investigators (guest speakers/instructors) leading class discussions on the conduct of funded research projects (e.g., federal, foundation), clinical research, or other research endeavors specific to topics in health psychology; discussion of unique health psychology models/theories, and emphasis on the collaboration of many different disciplines conducting medical/health research with a behavioral/psychology component.
PSCL 502	Seminar: Pediatric Psychology	1 - 3 Units	Seminar examining specific topics in pediatric psychology. Topics will deal with issues of infant development. Infants at risk for disability, neuropsychology and learning disabilities, and childhood psychopathology. Recommended preparation: Limited to Graduate students in Psychology department.
PSCL 510	Psychology and Diversity	3 Units	Diversity and multiculturalism in psychological theory, research and practice.
PSCL 524	Advanced Psychopathology	3 Units	Theoretical issues and current research data bearing on major patterns of psychological disturbance.
PSCL 525	Ethical and Professional Issues in Psychology	3 Units	Consideration of legal and ethical principles in research and practice in clinical psychology and contemporary controversies in professional psychology. Recommended preparation: Graduate standing in Psychology
PSCL 529A	Practicum in Intervention I: Behavior Therapy	1 Unit	Recommended Preparation: Graduate standing in clinical psychology.
PSCL 530A	Practicum in Intervention II: Behavior Therapy	1 Unit	Recommended preparation: Graduate standing in clinical psychology.
PSCL 530C	Practicum in Intervention II: Psychodynamic	1 Unit	Recommended preparation: Graduate standing in clinical psychology.
PSCL 531A	Seminar in Intervention I: Behavior Therapy	2 Units	Theoretical issues and research on psychological interventions. Recommended preparation: Graduate standing in clinical psychology.
PSCL 532A	Seminar in Intervention II: Behavior Therapy	2 Units	Theoretical issues and research on psychological interventions. Recommended preparation: Graduate standing in clinical psychology.
PSCL 532C	Seminar in Intervention II: Psychodynamic	2 Units	Theoretical issues and research on psychodynamic intervention. Recommended preparation: PSCL 531C and graduate standing in clinical psychology.
PSCL 534	Advanced Psychotherapy	3 Units	The goals of this course are: to provide an overview of a range of psychotherapeutic approaches, primarily those that address anxiety and depressive disorders, and to discuss the evidence for and implementation of such therapy approaches. Prereq: Must be enrolled in PhD Psychology with a concentration in Clinical Psychology or Requisites Not Met permission.
PSCL 535	Child and Family Intervention	2 Units	A course for advanced clinical graduate students that covers psychodynamic and cognitive behavioral approaches for working with children and adolescents and systems approaches for working with families.
PSCL 536	Advanced Child and Family Intervention	2 Units	A course for advanced clinical graduate students that covers evidence-based approaches to child and family therapy as well as parent training.  Special emphasis on empirically guided treatment planning and outcome evaluation.
PSCL 537	Child and Family Case Seminar I	1 Unit	Clinical graduate students in child and family field placements present and receive group supervision on ongoing cases.
PSCL 538	Child and Family Case Seminar II	1 Unit	Clinical graduate students in child and family field placements present and receive group supervision on ongoing cases.
PSCL 539	Supervised Field Placement Year 3	0 Unit	Supervised training in clinical psychology in agency, hospital, or university settings. Required in Fall and Spring terms of all third year students in the clinical psychology training program. Recommended preparation: PSCL 531A, PSCL 532A.
PSCL 540	Supervised Field Placement Year 4	0 Unit	Supervised training in clinical psychology in agency, hospital, or university settings. Required in Fall and Spring terms of all fourth year students in the clinical psychology training program. Recommended preparation: PSCL 531A, PSCL 532A.
PSCL 601	Special Problems	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
PSCL 651	Thesis M.A.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
PSCL 700	Internship	0 Unit	Full-time predoctoral internship in clinical psychology. Required of all students in clinical psychology program. Registration requires written consent of director of clinical psychology training and must be for one calendar year.
PSCL 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
MPHP 101	Introduction to Public Health	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the science and art of public health through understanding historical and current issues through public health case histories and controversies. Students will be introduced to social, behavioral, cultural, and environmental influences on population health. Emphasis is placed on social justice as a central component of public health, with an overview of health inequity and commitment to vulnerable populations. Core public health practices relating to health promotion program design, community assessment and improvement planning, health communication, health policy and enforcement, and health behavior change will be featured. The course will promote understanding of health care and public health systems domestically and globally, including preparedness for and response to public health emergencies.
MPHP 301	Introduction to Epidemiology	3 Units	This course begins with the exploration of the history, philosophy and uses of epidemiology. It then moves to the basic descriptive functions of epidemiology such as condition, frequency and severity. Data is used to describe qualitatively and quantitatively diseases and injuries in a population. Applications include identifying patterns of disease and injury over time and geography The course them moves to analytical epidemiology with focus on estimation, inference, bias, confounding and adjustment in the determination of what factors are associated with, or cause disease or injury. The different kinds of study designs are introduced including ecologic, cross-sectional, case-control, retrospective and prospective cohort, and experimental designs such as clinical trials. Students are introduced to evidence-based public health with analysis of harm, benefit and cost, and intervention effectiveness. The course concludes with applications to policy, covering outbreak investigation/testing/screening, public health policy and special epidemiologic applications including molecular and genetic epidemiology, environmental health and safety, unintentional injury and violence prevention and behavioral sciences.  Recommended preparation: A course in statistics taken before or concurrently with MPHP 301.
MPHP 306	History and Philosophy of Public Health	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the science and art of public health through an understanding of the history and philosophies that represent its foundation. Students will learn about the essentials of public health and applications of those precepts throughout history and in the present.  The course will examine public health case histories and controversies from the past and present, in order to better understand solutions for the future. Offered as MPHP 306 and MPHP 406. Prereq: Enrollment limited to juniors and seniors only.
MPHP 313	Health Education, Communication, and Advocacy	3 Units	Historical, sociological, and philosophical factors that have influenced definitions and the practice of health education and health promotion are studied.  Advanced concepts in health communication theory will also be explored.  This course is designed to educate, motivate, and empower undergraduate and graduate students to become advocates for their own health, the health of their peers, and the health of the community. Offered as MPHP 313 and MPHP 413.
MPHP 405	Statistical Methods in Public Health	3 Units	This one-semester survey course for public health students is intended to provide the fundamental concepts and methods of biostatistics as applied predominantly to public health problems.  The emphasis is on interpretation and concepts rather than calculations.  Topics include descriptive statistics; vital statistics; sampling; estimation and significance testing; sample size and power; correlation and regression; spatial and temporal trends; small area analysis; statistical issues in policy development.  Examples of statistical methods will be drawn from public health practice.  Use of computer statistical packages will be introduced. Prereq: Enrollment limited to Master of Public Health or Epidemiology & Biostatistics students.
MPHP 406	History and Philosophy of Public Health	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the science and art of public health through an understanding of the history and philosophies that represent its foundation. Students will learn about the essentials of public health and applications of those precepts throughout history and in the present.  The course will examine public health case histories and controversies from the past and present, in order to better understand solutions for the future. Offered as MPHP 306 and MPHP 406. Prereq: Enrollment limited to Master of Public Health or Epidemiology & Biostatistics students.
MPHP 411	Introduction to Health Behavior	3 Units	Using a biopsychosocial perspective, an overview of the measurement and modeling of behavioral, social, psychological, and environmental factors related to disease prevention, disease management, and health promotion is provided. Offered as PQHS 411 and MPHP 411. Prereq: Enrollment limited to Master of Public Health or Epidemiology & Biostatistics students.
MPHP 412	Racism and Public Health	3 Units	Racism is a threat to public health.  Across the US, an increasing number of communities have declared racism as a public health crisis.  This declaration is not based on an isolated incident, rather, it is the acknowledgement that racism is structural and has been embedded within the institutional policies and societal norms that are present in our everyday lives.  This course will: Recognize racism in the US as a significant cause of poor health, disease, and persistent dis-ease among Black Americans;  Explore the relationship between racism and health through a historic accounting of social, political, economic, and environmental conditions post-slavery through the current events of 2020; and, identify how, research, policy, practice, and advocacy can address anti-Black racism and promote health equity.
MPHP 413	Health Education, Communication, and Advocacy	3 Units	Historical, sociological, and philosophical factors that have influenced definitions and the practice of health education and health promotion are studied.  Advanced concepts in health communication theory will also be explored.  This course is designed to educate, motivate, and empower undergraduate and graduate students to become advocates for their own health, the health of their peers, and the health of the community. Offered as MPHP 313 and MPHP 413.
MPHP 419	Topics in Urban Health in the United States	3 Units	The focus of this course is on designing sustainable urban policies and programs for advancing health equity in Greater Cleveland. The course builds on recent declarations of racism as a public health crisis in Cuyahoga County and the City of Cleveland and ongoing work in applying system dynamics to addressing structural racism for advancing regional equity.  The course introduces the use of system dynamics for understanding urban health inequities and designing sustainable social policies and programs for advancing health equity. The course will cover model structure and its relationships to prior knowledge and assumptions, measurable quantities, and ultimate use in solving problems. Application areas focus on social issues of equity in health, education, and general wellbeing emphasizing transdisciplinary integration of systems (vertically from cells to society and horizontality across systems). Model verification is discussed, along with the basic theory and practice of system dynamics.  Quantitative methods are emphasized including the formulation and testing of mathematical models of feedback systems and the use of numeric data and estimation of parameters.   Special attention will be given to understanding the dynamics of social and economic justice, value and ethical issues, as well as issues related to race, ethnicity, culture, gender, sexual orientation, religion, physical or mental disability or illness, age, and national origin. Offered as PQHS 419 and MPHP 419.
MPHP 421	Health Economics and Strategy	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to develop the analytical skills necessary for understanding how the U.S. health care sector operates, how it has evolved, the forces at work behind perceived deficiencies (in quality and cost control), and the impact of alternative policy proposals. Special attention is giving to recent developments in the healthcare marketplace, and the strategic considerations they create for providers and insurers. These issues are addressed through the lens of microeconomic theory. Under this framework, outcomes result from the interaction of decisions made by participants in the healthcare economy (e.g. patients, providers, insurers, government), with those decisions governed by the preferences, incentives and resource constraints facing each decision-maker. Principles of microeconomics will be reviewed as necessary to ensure consistent understanding of basic concepts. The course is designed to appeal to a broad audience, particularly students interested in healthcare management, public health, medical innovation, health law, and public policymaking. Offered as HSMC 421 and MPHP 421.
MPHP 426	An Introduction to GIS for Health and Social Sciences	3 Units	This course is designed to give students a first exposure to understanding how GIS is integral to understanding a wide variety of public health problems. It introduces students to current spatial approaches in health research and provides a set of core skills that will allow students to apply these techniques toward their own interests.  Subject matter will include chronic diseases, infectious diseases, and vectored diseases examples. Other topics related to social determinants of health and current events (e.g., violence, overdoses, disaster and homelessness) will also be incorporated. Students will be exposed to different types of data and different applications of these data (for example, hospitals, police departments), enabling them to think "outside the box" about how GIS can be utilized to solve real-world problems. Students will learn classic mapping and hotspot techniques. In addition, they will be introduced to novel ways to collect geospatial field data using online sources (Google Street View), primary data collection (spatial video) and mixed method approaches (spatial video geonarratives), all of which represent the cutting edge of spatial epidemiology. Offered as MPHP 426 and PQHS 426.
MPHP 429	Introduction to Environmental Health	3 Units	This survey course will introduce students to environmental and occupational health topics including individual, community, population, and global issues. Students will develop an understanding of the human health impacts of physical, biological, and chemical agents in the environment and workplace including basic principles of toxicology. Presentation of concepts including risk assessment, communication and management as well as discussion of environmental and occupational practices, policies and regulations that promote public and population health is included.
MPHP 431	Statistical Methods I	3 Units	Application of statistical techniques with particular emphasis on problems in the biomedical sciences.  Basic probability theory, random variables, and distribution functions.  Point and interval estimation, regression, and correlation.  Problems whose solution involves using packaged statistical programs.  First part of year-long sequence. Offered as ANAT 431, BIOL 431, CRSP 431, PQHS 431 and MPHP 431.
MPHP 432	Statistical Methods II	3 Units	Methods of analysis of variance, regression and analysis of quantitative data.  Emphasis on computer solution of problems drawn from the biomedical sciences.  Design of experiments, power of tests, and adequacy of models.  Offered as BIOL 432, PQHS 432, CRSP 432 and MPHP 432. Prereq: MPHP 431.
MPHP 433	Community Interventions and Program Evaluation	3 Units	This course prepares students to design, conduct, and assess community-based health interventions and program evaluation. Topics include assessment of need, evaluator/stakeholder relationship, process vs. outcome-based objectives, data collection, assessment of program objective achievement based on process and impact, cost-benefit analyses, and preparing the evaluation report to stakeholders. Recommended preparation: PQHS 490, PQHS 431, or MPHP 405. Offered as PQHS 433 and MPHP 433. Prereq: MPHP 411
MPHP 439	Public Health Management and Policy	3 Units	This course is designed to introduce students to the basics of health policy-making and includes a background on the basic structure and components of the US Health Care System (such as organization, delivery and financing).  It will also cover introductory concepts in public health management, including the role of the manager, organizational design and control, and accountability.  We will address relevant legal, political and ethical issues using case examples.  At the end of the course, students will understand how health policy is developed and implemented in various contexts, and the challenges facing system-wide efforts at reform.  This is a required course for the MPH degree.  Grades will be based on a series of assignments. Prereq: Enrollment limited to Master of Public Health or Epidemiology & Biostatistics students.
MPHP 441	Climate Change and Health	3 Units	This course will teach students from a variety of disciplinary backgrounds about i) the effects of climate change on human health, ii) the social, political, and economic contexts of climate change and health, and iii) potential approaches to address these challenges.
MPHP 450	Clinical Trials and Intervention Studies	3 Units	Issues in the design, organization, and operation of randomized, controlled clinical trials and intervention studies. Emphasis on long-term multicenter trials. Topics include legal and ethical issues in the design; application of concepts of controls, masking, and randomization; steps required for quality data collection; monitoring for evidence of adverse or beneficial treatment effects; elements of organizational structure; sample size calculations and data analysis procedures; and common mistakes. Recommended preparation: PQHS 431. Offered as PQHS 450 and MPHP 450.
MPHP 451	A Data-Driven Introduction to Genomics and Human Health	3 Units	This course introduces the foundational concepts of genomics and genetic epidemiology through four key principles: 1) Teaching students how to query relational databases using Structure Query Language (SQL); 2) Exposing students to the most current data used in genomics and bioinformatics research, providing a quantitative understanding of biological concepts; 3) Integrating newly learned concepts with prior ones to discover new relationships among biological concepts; and 4) providing historical context to how and why data were generated and stored in the way they were, and how this gave rise to modern concepts in genomics.    Offered as PQHS 451, GENE 451, and MPHP 451.
MPHP 456	Health Policy and Management Decisions	3 Units	This seminar course combines broad health care policy issue analysis with study of the implications for specific management decisions in organizations. This course is intended as an applied, practical course where the policy context is made relevant to the individual manager. Offered as HSMC 456 and MPHP 456.
MPHP 460	Complex Systems in Health and Healthcare: Why is Obesity a Complex Problem, not Complicated	3 Units	This interdisciplinary seminar is designed for graduate students in public health, medicine, nursing, management, and any social science discipline. (Others accepted at the discretion of the instructors.) The course is designed to explore the nature of complex systems and how the principles of complex systems apply to health and health care from the micro- to the macro-level.
MPHP 464	Obesity and Cancer: Views from Molecules to Health Policy	3 Units	This course will provide an overview of the components of energy balance (diet, physical activity, resting metabolic rate, dietary induced thermogenesis) and obesity, a consequence of long term positive energy balance, and various types of cancer. Following an overview of energy balance and epidemiological evidence for the obesity epidemic, the course will proceed with an introduction to the cellular and molecular biology of energy metabolism. Then, emerging research on biologically plausible connections and epidemiological associations between obesity and various types of cancer (e.g., colon, breast) will be presented. Finally, interventions targeted at decreasing obesity and improving quality of life in cancer patients will be discussed. The course will be cooperatively-taught by a transdisciplinary team of scientists engaged in research in energy balance and/or cancer. Didactic lectures will be combined with classroom discussion of readings. The paper assignment will involve application of course principles, lectures and readings. Offered as PQHS 464 and MPHP 464.
MPHP 466	Promoting Health Across Boundaries	3 Units	This course examines the concepts of health and boundary spanning and how the synergy of the two can produce new, effective approaches to promoting health. Students will explore and analyze examples of individuals and organizations boundary spanning for health to identify practice features affecting health, compare and contrast practices and approaches, and evaluate features and context that promote or inhibit boundary spanning and promoting health. Offered as MPHP 466, PQHS 466, SOCI 466, NURS 466 and BETH 466. Prereq: Graduate student status or instructor consent.
MPHP 467	Comparative and Cost Effectiveness Research	1 Unit	Comparative effectiveness research is a cornerstone of healthcare reform.  It holds the promise of improved health outcomes and cost containment.  This course is presented in a convenient 5-day intensive format in June.  There are reading assignments due prior to the 1st session.  Module A, Days 1-2: Overview of comparative effectiveness research (CER) from a wide array of perspectives: individual provider, institution, insurer, patient, government, and society.  Legal, ethical and social issues, as well as implications for population and public health, including health disparities will also be a component. Module B, Day 3: Introduction to the various methods, and their strengths, weaknesses and limitations.  How to read and understand CER papers. Module C, Days 4-5: Cost-Effectiveness Analysis.  This will cover costing, cost analysis, clinical decision analysis, quality of life and cost-effectiveness analysis for comparing alternative health care strategies.  Trial version of TreeAge software will be used to create and analyze a simple cost-effectiveness model.  The full 3-credit course is for taking all 3 modules.  Modules A or C can be taken alone for 1 credit.  Modules A and B or Modules B and C can be taken together for a total of  2 credits.  Module B cannot be taken alone.  If taking for 2 or 3 credits, some combination of term paper, project and/or exam will be due 30 days later. Offered as PQHS 467 and MPHP 467.
MPHP 468	The Continual Improvement of Healthcare: An Interdisciplinary Course	3 Units	This course prepares students to be members of interprofessional teams to engage in the continual improvement in health care.  The focus is on working together for the benefit of patients and communities to enhance quality and safety. Offered as PQHS 468, MPHP 468, and NURS 468.
MPHP 482	Qualitative and Mixed Methods in Public Health	3 Units	Understanding complex public health issues requires both qualitative and quantitative inquiry.  The exploration of the perceptions and experiences of people is as essential as analyzing the relationships among variables.  Often, the integration of the two methods is required in order to effectively address the significant health issues faced by today's society. It is the purpose of this course to facilitate a meaningful and substantive learning process around engaging in, and critically analyzing, qualitative and mixed methods research in public health.  This includes gaining first-hand experience in research design and collecting, managing, analyzing, and interpreting data for the purposes of making data-driven program and policy recommendations.  In addition, students will have the opportunity to engage with local professionals engaged in qualitative and mixed methods research.
MPHP 483	Introduction to Epidemiology for Public Health Practice	3 Units	This course is designed to introduce the basic principles and methods of epidemiology.  Epidemiology has been referred to as the basic science for public health.  Application of epidemiologic principles is critical to disease prevention, as well as in the development and evaluation of public policy.  The course will emphasize basic methods (study design, measures of disease occurrence, measures of association, and causality) necessary for epidemiologic research.  It is intended for students who have a basic understanding of the principals of human disease as well as statistics. Prereq: Enrollment limited to Master of Public Health or Epidemiology & Biostatistics students.
MPHP 484	Global Health Epidemiology	1 - 3 Units	This course provides a rigorous problem-centered training in the epidemiology, prevention, treatment, and control of infectious diseases and, more generally, global health.  This is an advanced epidemiology that embraces an active learning environment. Students are expected to invest time out of the classroom  reading and working with classmates. Classes will be conducted with discussions, debates, group projects, and group presentations.  By taking this course, students will develop a framework for interpreting, assessing, and performing epidemiologic research on issues of global importance.  The course will be divided into three modules:1) Global Health Epidemiology  2) Helminth Epidemiology, and 3) Epidemiology of Disease Elimination.  Each module is worth 1 credit hour and may be taken separately.  Each module will have a separate project and/or exam.  The final exam time will be used for group presentations and panel discussion.  Active class participation is required through discussions, case studies, and group projects. Offered as PQHS 484, INTH 484, and MPHP 484.
MPHP 485	Adolescent Development	3 Units	Adolescent Development can be viewed as the overriding framework for approaching disease prevention and health promotion for this age group. This course will review the developmental tasks of adolescence and identify the impact of adolescent development on youth risk behaviors. It will build a conceptual and theoretical framework through which to address and change adolescent behavior to promote health.
MPHP 489	Women's Public Health	3 Units	This course aims to cover local and global issues as they pertain to women. Many major issues of global health concern will be addressed, including the health-demoting effects of poverty, racism, patriarchy, and inhumane conditions of life and labor in many countries; men's and women's sexuality in the era of HIV/AIDS; the politics of epidemic disease control and other disasters, and the role of communities, nation-states, and international organizations in responding to such crises; issues of coercion in population control and the quest for reproductive rights; and how child health is ultimately dependent on the health and well-being of mothers. The underlying purpose of the course is to develop students' awareness of the political, socioeconomic, ecological, and cultural complexity of most health problems in resource-constrained and resource-rich nations and the consequent need for cultural sensitivity, contextualization, and activist involvement in the field of global health.
MPHP 490	Epidemiology: Introduction to Theory and Methods	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to the principles of epidemiology covering the basic methods necessary for population and clinic-based research.  Students will be introduced to epidemiologic study designs, measures of disease occurrence, measures of risk estimation, and casual inference (bias, confounding, and interaction) with application of these principles to specific fields of epidemiology.  Classes will be a combination of lectures, discussion, and in-class exercises.  It is intended for students who have a basic understanding of the principals of human disease and statistics. Offered as PQHS 490 and MPHP 490. Prereq or Coreq: PQHS 431 or Requisites Not Met permission.
MPHP 496	The Evolution of Public Health into Global Health Practice	3 Units	This short course will use readings and case studies to explore the motivating factors in the emergence of global health interventions over the last 200 years, with a focus on its roots in public health practice, its expanding scope in the early to mid- 20th century, and the strengths and weaknesses of modern global health interventions. Readings and seminar discussions will involve consideration of the changing definitions of "public health", and of the spaces in which public health interventions are expected to occur.
MPHP 499	Independent Study	1 - 18 Units	
MPHP 510	Health Disparities	3 Units	This course aims to provide theoretical and application tools for students from many disciplinary backgrounds to conduct research and develop interventions to reduce health disparities. The course will be situated contextually within the historical record of the United States, reviewing social, political, economic, cultural, legal, and ethical theories related to disparities in general, with a central focus on health disparities. Several frameworks regarding health disparities will be used for investigating and discussing the empirical evidence on disparities among other subgroups (e.g., the poor, women, uninsured, disabled, and non-English speaking populations) will also be included and discussed. Students will be expected to develop a research proposal (observational, clinical, and/or intervention) rooted in their disciplinary background that will incorporate materials from the various perspectives presented throughout the course, with the objective of developing and reinforcing a more comprehensive approach to current practices within their fields.  Offered as CRSP 510, PQHS 510, MPHP 510, NURS 510, and SASS 510.
MPHP 532	Health Care Information Systems	3 Units	This course covers concepts, techniques and technologies for providing information systems to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of health care organizations. Offered as HSMC 432 and MPHP 532.
MPHP 540	Operational Aspects of Global Health and Emergency Response	3 Units	Among professional in the medical field and the field of public health, there is a gap in knowledge, structure and research in best practices surrounding emergency response. This gap results from the limited number of training programs in the United States that focus on this very specialized field and the limited number of academic partnerships with international non-governmental organizations (NGOs).  This course helps remedy this gap by introducing public health students and international emergency medicine fellows to the overall structure and operations of international humanitarian coordination systems, types of emergency response, morbidity and mortality associated with various emergencies, and the actors and institutions involved. The course highlights, through reading, workshops, and examples, the real world issues that must be faced and overcome in the field during emergency response operations.
MPHP 650	Public Health Practicum	1 - 3 Units	The Public Health Practicum is an integral component of the MPH curriculum, allowing students to apply, develop, and refine their conceptual knowledge and skills as part of a planned, supervised, and evaluated community-based experience. The Practicum is designed to move students beyond the walls of academia, to understand the political, economic, social, and organizational contexts within which public health activities are conducted.   To complete the Practicum, students must complete three credits of MPHP 650, dedicating at least 120 hours to a substantial public health experience, and attend Community Health Research and Practice (CHRP) group meetings. Prereq: Complete at least 9 credit hours in the MPH program and be in good academic standing.
MPHP 652	Public Health Capstone Experience	1 - 9 Units	Public health field practicum, involving a placement at a community-based field site, and a Master's essay.  The field placement will provide students with the opportunity to apply the knowledge and skills acquired through their Master of Public Health academic program to a problem involving the health of the community.  Students will learn to communicate with target groups in an effective manner; to identify ethical, social, and cultural issues relating to public health policies, research, and interventions; to identify the process by which decisions are made within the agency or organization; and to identify and coordinate use of resources at the placement site.  The Master's essay represents the culminating experience required for the degree program and may take the form of a research thesis, an evaluation study, or an intervention study.  Each student is required to formally present the experience and research findings.  In any semester in which a student is registered for MPHP 652 credit, it is required that the student attend the Community Health Research and Practice (CHRP) group at a minimum of two sessions per 3 credits.  CHRP is held once a week for approximately an hour and a half for the duration of fall, spring, and summer semesters.  MPHP 652 credit is available only to Master of Public Health students.
MPHP 653	Public Health Capstone Experience	1 - 6 Units	The Public Health Capstone is a multi-semester project intended to provide students with the opportunity to develop a broad understanding of their chosen topic area, the ability to communicate effectively with target groups and professionals, and develop skills necessary for scientific investigation. The Public Health Capstone provides students with the opportunity to apply the knowledge and skills acquired through their Master of Public Health academic program to a problem involving the health of the community. Students work in conjunction with a community organization; therefore, the Capstone is expected to be mutually beneficial to both the student's educational goals as well as the host organization. At the conclusion of the Capstone experience, students are required to submit a capstone essay, which represents the culminating experience required for the degree program and may take the form of a research thesis, an evaluation study, or an intervention study.  Each student is required to formally present the experience and research findings. While engaged in the Public Health Capstone, students are expected to attend the Community Health Research and Practice (CHRP) seminar, held weekly on Tuesdays at 12:00pm. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
MPHP 655	Dual Degree Field Practicum II	3 Units	This course is designed to be taken by MSSA/MPH joint degree students as the second field period of their master's program. It consists of a field practicum and participation in professional development opportunities. The Field Practicum is an integral component of the MSASS and MPH curriculums, allowing students to apply, develop, and refine their conceptual knowledge and skills as part of a planned, supervised, and evaluated community-based experience. The Practicum is designed to move students beyond the walls of academia, to understand the political, economic, social, and organizational contexts within which social work and public health activities are conducted. These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent developing practitioners. (EPAAS Program Objective M6 and EPAAS Content Area 4.7) The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level MSSA/MPH joint degree students with field related opportunities to continue to develop foundation level competencies in the eight MSSAS abilities by helping students apply knowledge of social work and public health theory, skills, values and ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting. Offered as MPHP 655 and SASS 655.
MPHP 656	Dual Degree Field Capstone III	3 Units	The Public Health Capstone Project is an integral component of the MPH curriculum, allowing students to apply, develop, and refine their conceptual knowledge and skills as part of a planned, mentored, and evaluated public health scholarly project. This course is designed to be taken by advanced level students. It consists of a 288 hour field based Capstone experience and participation in 12 hours of professional development opportunities. The overall goal of this course is designed to move students beyond the walls and constraints of the classroom, to understand the political, economic, social, and organizational contexts within which public health and social work activities are conducted. It is also designed  to provide graduate level dual degree students with field related opportunities to begin to develop advanced level competencies in the eight abilities by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values and ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting.     These collective experiences provide students with a forum to continue to develop and hone social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent developing practitioners. (EPAS Program Objective M6 and EPAS Content Area 4.7) Offered as SASS 656 and MPHP 656. Prereq: MPHP 655.
MPHP 657	Dual Degree Field Capstone IV	3 Units	The Public Health Capstone Project is an integral component of the MPH curriculum, allowing students to apply, develop, and refine their conceptual knowledge and skills as part of a planned, mentored, and evaluated public health scholarly project. This course is designed to be taken by advanced level students. It consists of a 288 hour field based Capstone experience and participation in 12 hours of professional development opportunities. The overall goal of this course is designed to move students beyond the walls and constraints of the classroom, to understand the political, economic, social, and organizational contexts within which public health and social work activities are conducted. It is also designed to provide graduate level dual degree students with field related opportunities to begin to develop advanced level competencies in the eight abilities by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values and ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting. Offered as MPHP 657 and SASS 657.
RGME 467	Commercialization and Intellectual Property Management	3 Units	This interdisciplinary course covers a variety of topics, including principles of intellectual property and intellectual property management, business strategies and modeling relevant to the creation of start-up companies and exploitation of IP rights as they relate to biomedical-related inventions.  The goal of this course is to address issues relating to the commercialization of biomedical-related inventions by exposing law students, MBA students, and Ph.D. candidates (in genetics and proteomics) to the challenges and opportunities encountered when attempting to develop biomedical intellectual property from the point of early discovery to the clinic and market.  Specifically, this course seeks to provide students with the ability to value a given technological advance or invention holistically, focusing on issues that extend beyond scientific efficacy and include patient and practitioner value propositions, legal and intellectual property protection, business modeling, potential market impacts, market competition, and ethical, social, and healthcare practitioner acceptance.  During this course, law students, MBA students, and Ph.D. candidates in genomics and proteomics will work in teams of five (two laws students, two MBA students and one Ph.D. candidate), focusing on issues of commercialization and IP management of biomedical-related inventions.  The instructors will be drawn from the law school, business school, and technology-transfer office.  Please visit the following website for more information: fusioninnovate.com. Offered as EBME 467, ECSE 467, GENE 367, GENE 467, LAWS 5341, MGMT 467, and RGME 467.
RGME 525	Current Topics in Regenerative Medicine	2 Units	Current Topics in Regenerative Medicine, will be an elective course in the newly approved Master's Program in Regenerative Medicine and Entrepreneurship. The objective of this course is for each student to develop a general understanding of concepts and current topics related to Regenerative Medicine, Stem Cell research, entrepreneurship and product development.   -To expose students to principles in Cell Biology and Tissue Engineering relevant to the field -To review the current landscape and spectrum of topics which makes up the field of regenerative medicine -To explore current and emerging technologies supporting regenerative medicine research -To discuss federal regulatory and compliance issues related to clinical research and the development of therapeutics -To explore cellular manufacturing approaches for regenerative medicine products -Discuss ethical and societal issues related to regenerative medicine research and technologies
RGME 529	FDA Regulation in Entrepreneurship and Clinical Research	0 - 3 Units	The FDA Regulation in Entrepreneurship and Clinical Research course is designed to provide foundational knowledge in the FDA approval and regulatory process while highlighting scientific, clinical, ethical, and other related emergent factors for consideration. The course includes a series of lecture-based classes delivered by content experts and interdisciplinary team-based learning discussions of case studies designed for the application of lecture content. Students who elect to take the course for three credits as opposed to one credit will go through the process of reviewing an example Investigational New Drug (IND) or Investigational Drug Exemption (IDE) Application (midterm project) and preparing an IND or IDE for submission (final project) with the guidance of nationally renowned experts in FDA regulation and law. The primary goal of this course is that upon completion, students will be able to take the knowledge gained from content experts and apply it to facilitate the movement of their current or future technologies through the FDA approval process.  Offered as CRSP 529, PHRM 529 and RGME 529.
RGME 535	Foundations in Regenerative Medicine	3 Units	Foundations in Regenerative Medicine is a team-taught course using multiple faculty content experts. The objective of this course is for each student to develop a general understanding of the foundations and concepts related to Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell research.  -To expose students to foundational principles in Cell Biology and Tissue Engineering relevant to the field -To review the current landscape and spectrum of topics which makes up the field of regenerative medicine -To explore current and emerging technologies supporting regenerative medicine research -To discuss federal regulatory and compliance issues related to clinical research and the development of therapeutics -To explore cellular manufacturing approaches for regenerative medicine products -Discuss ethical and societal issues related to regenerative medicine research and technologies
RGME 545	Stem Product Biology, Bench to Bedside Development and Therapeutic Translation	3 Units	This course is a team - taught course using multiple faculty content experts. The objective of this course is for each student to understand the concept of stem cell biology from procurement to therapeutic development. This course will provide an overview of the regulatory framework, concepts, lab operations, and biologic techniques to support cell and regenerative medicine product manufacturing. To work in this emerging field, students must understand the scientific and regulatory development of biologic therapies as well as operational issues related to manufacturing in the cleanroom space under quality systems. The goals are to:  1	Develop an understanding of the infrastructure and compliance required to manufacture biologics for clinical use of stem cells. 2	Identify and critically analyze key operational issues related to clinical development and use of biologics from expansion to pre-clinical validation and therapeutic use.  3	Perform hands on activities using current techniques. 4	Discuss ethical and societal issues related to regenerative medicine research and technologies.
RGME 547	Gene Therapy and Concepts in Regenerative Medicine	3 Units	This course focuses on the principles of gene therapy for disease treatment or drug delivery. Technical aspects associated with the development of the therapeutic approach will be covered along with the concepts related to the legal, ethical, economic, religious, and philosophical consequences of implementing gene-editing technologies for common and rare (often childhood) diseases. The "agora" will define ethical considerations of risk/benefit, informed consent, priority therapy targets, optimal technologies and delivery, costs, FDA regulation, and desired outcomes across disciplines.This course will be available to all students at CWRU, with consent of instructor.  Students must have a foundational understanding in cell biology, exposure to regenerative medicine and genetics.  Recommended Preperation: RGME 535 or RGME 525.
RGME 549	Advanced Regenerative Medicine: Innovation and Applications	3 Units	This course is a literature based class.  The review of regenerative medicine literature with presentations by students so that they learn how to interpret literature critically.
RGME 550	Basic Laboratory Exposure and Techniques	3 Units	This course is a laboratory exposure class which allows students to explore different regenerative medicine labs for the course of a semester, to learn how to be in a lab and the important dynamics of successful, productive involvement.   Students will have the opportunity to get exposure and learn basic techniques in the laboratory to aid in facilitating transition to their research proposal or commercial internship.   The course will include issues related to professionalism in the laboratory, maintenance of good notes and books and laboratory, administrative dynamics. Regardless of the activities, the work must culminate in a final paper that will outline the experiences and the professional networks established.  Course Learning Objectives:  1	Students are expected to learning basic laboratory skills for reproducibility and attention to details. These will include but are limited to pipetting techniques, management of basic equipment for weighing, pH and making reagents.  Sterile technique will also be incorporated. 2	Refine a detailed attention to good laboratory notebooks, computer skills and basic data analysis.  3	Provide the foundation for professionalism, in the laboratory and in potential employee interactions. For students pursuing an independent study while continuing their work experience as a part-time student, the focus of the independent study project may not be the result of a project in the same laboratory or on a project being undertaken within their specific department. Prereq: Enrolled in the Regenerative Medicine & Entrepreneurship Masters Program.
RGME 560	Regenerative Medicine Independent Study, Research Project	3 Units	The RGME 560 Independent Study-Research Project allows students to explore a topic of interest under the close supervision of a RGME program director and mentor. The course may include directed readings, applied work, assisting a faculty member with a research project, carrying out an independent research project, or other activities deemed appropriate. Regardless of the activities, the work must culminate in a formal paper. The specific course requirements are described in the Independent Studies Proposal form to be completed by the student, project mentor and program director prior to enrollment in the course. Prereq: RGME 535 and RGME 545.
RGME 565	Regenerative Medicine Independent Study, Internship	3 Units	The RGME 565 Independent Study-Industry Internship provides students with the opportunity to gain practical experience within an industry environment. Course objectives are: -Acquire knowledge of the industry sector in which the internship is completed. -Translate knowledge and skills learned in the classroom into a work environment. -Explore additional career options available with the designated industry sector. -Identify areas for future knowledge and skill development. Prereq: RGME 535 and RGME 545.
BIOC 101	Frontiers in Biochemistry	1 Unit	The goal of this course is to introduce first- and second-year students to the field of biochemistry as a fundamental discipline in the biomedical sciences. The course will present basic concepts in biochemistry and highlight recent advances. It will also emphasize the way that biochemistry forms a foundation for research in many other areas of the basic and clinical biomedical sciences and provides the molecular basis for new therapies. Finally, the course will feature an introduction to the practice of biochemistry, including research and careers in biochemistry. This course is an excellent introduction for students who are considering majoring in Biochemistry.  Material will be presented in a format that is accessible to students who have taken high school biology and chemistry.
BIOC 285	Honors Readings in Biochemistry	1 Unit	This course for students in the Biochemistry Honors Research track will introduce students to biochemistry through weekly one-on-one meetings with a faculty mentor. Students will read and discuss articles from the scientific literature and work with the mentor to find a placement for their undergraduate research. There will also be sessions on the responsible conduct of research. Open by permission to students in the Biochemistry Research Honors Track.
BIOC 307	Introduction to Biochemistry: From Molecules To Medical Science	4 Units	Overview of the macromolecules and small molecules key to all living systems.  Topics include: protein structure and function; enzyme mechanisms, kinetics and regulation; membrane structure and function; bioenergetics; hormone action; intermediary metabolism, including pathways and regulation of carbohydrate, lipid, amino acid, and nucleotide biosynthesis and breakdown.  The material is presented to build links to human biology and human disease.  One semester of biology is recommended. Offered as BIOC 307 and BIOC 407. Prereq: CHEM 223 and CHEM 224.
BIOC 308	Molecular Biology	4 Units	An examination of the flow of genetic information from DNA to RNA to protein. Topics include: nucleic acid structure; mechanisms and control of DNA, RNA, and protein biosynthesis; recombinant DNA; and mRNA processing and modification. Where possible, eukaryotic and prokaryotic systems are compared. Special topics include yeast as a model organism, molecular biology of cancer, and molecular biology of the cell cycle. Current literature is discussed briefly as an introduction to techniques of genetic engineering. Recommended preparation: BIOC 307. Offered as BIOC 308 and BIOC 408. Prereq: BIOL 214 and BIOL 215 and (CHEM 223 or CHEM 323).
BIOC 310	Microbial Physiology and Therapeutic Opportunities	3 Units	This course will cover the physiology and metabolic pathways of microbes, with a biomedical emphasis on bacteria and archaea and a brief discussion of fungi and other eukaryotic organisms. We will emphasize how physiological and metabolic characteristics can either be targeted (in the case of infectious disease) or utilized/exploited (in the case of, for instance, antibiotics and other bioactive natural products and fermentation products). Offered as BIOC 310 and BIOC 410. Prereq: BIOL 215 and (CHEM 223 or CHEM 323).
BIOC 311	Antimicrobial Therapies and Resistance	3 Units	This course focuses on the biochemistry and molecular biology of antimicrobial compounds.  This includes antibiotics, the drugs clinically used to treat diseases caused by bacteria, antifungals, antiparasitic agents, and antivirals.  We will examine the history of antibiotic development; characteristics of chemicals used as antiseptics and disinfectants but unable to be used as therapies; and then survey synthetic and naturally-occurring antibiotic, antiviral, antifungal, and antiparasitic compounds. The biochemical mechanisms of action of different classes of each type of drug and mechanisms of resistance that have evolved over time will also be discussed.  Potential alternative therapies (e.g., phage therapy, antibodies, oligonucleotides) and preventatives (e.g., vaccines) will also be covered. Offered as BIOC 311 and BIOC 411. Prereq: BIOL 215 and (CHEM 223 or CHEM 323).
BIOC 312	Proteins and Enzymes	3 Units	Aspects of protein and nucleic acid function and interactions are discussed, including binding properties, protein-nucleic acid interactions, kinetics and mechanism of proteins and enzymes, and macromolecular machines. Recommended Preparation: CHEM 301. Offered as BIOC 312 and BIOC 412. Prereq: BIOC 307.
BIOC 315	Biological Membranes and Their Proteins	3 Units	This course will focus on the architecture and maintenance of biological membranes and membrane proteins, with emphasis on eukaryotic cells. The theory and experimental evidence of the fluid mosaic model of membranes will be a core theme as we discuss the plasma membrane, Golgi apparatus, and endoplasmic reticulum as part of the eukaryotic protein secretion system. Dynamics of vesicle transit, exocytosis and endocytosis, and metabolism of membrane lipids will be discussed through this course. This course will also examine the structure and function of membrane proteins that maintain the plasma membrane's integrity, polarity, and permeability. This will include the mechanisms of active and passive transport of molecules and ions, and how dysregulation can cause disease. The mechanism and effect of drugs and toxins on specific membrane protein targets and the downstream consequences of the action of these compounds will also be considered throughout the course. Offered as BIOC 315 and BIOC 415. Prereq: BIOC 307.
BIOC 334	Structural Biology	3 Units	Introduces the major techniques used to study high resolution three-dimensional structures of proteins, and their applications to biomedically-relevant problems.  Topics include the elucidation of protein structure by cryo-electron microscopy, X-ray crystallography, multidimensional NMR, and computational methods.   Offered as BIOC 334 and BIOC 434. Prereq: BIOC 307.
BIOC 344	Molecular Endocrinology	3 Units	A detailed biochemical examination of the hormonal signaling system of the human body and associated diseases. This includes mechanisms of glandular sensing and secretion, including metabolic signaling pathways (insulin and glucagon; leptin and ghrelin), the thyroid and thyroidisms, hypothalamus and pituitary gland, vitamin D and calcium homeostasis, among others. Molecular-level analysis of extra- and intra-cellular signaling pathways will be covered and critical differences in canonical pathways in specific tissue types will be emphasized. Additional topics will include amine neurotransmitters and affective disorders, steroid hormones and nuclear receptors, and circadian rhythm and sleep. Offered as BIOC 344 and BIOC 444. Prereq: BIOC 307.
BIOC 345	Metabolic Dysregulation and Human Disease	3 Units	A molecular examination of the processes and regulation of the synthesis of biomolecules, their mechanistic roles in human biochemistry, and how dysfunction of these processes can lead to disease. We will discuss the dynamic maintenance of chemical homeostasis and health, specifically in terms of cellular energy demands, redox balance, and detection and mitigation of foreign substances. The diseases caused by dysregulation and failure of these systems, and the current state of knowledge will be integrated throughout the course. The metabolically critical small molecules (B-vitamins, among others) and trace elements important to health will be discussed in regard to absorption, transport, deficiency, and toxicity; as well as enzyme mechanisms for which they are cofactors. We will also discuss weaknesses in current understanding of human-specific metabolism and controversial supplementation as student-led discussions and presentations. Offered as BIOC 345 and BIOC 445. Prereq: BIOC 307.
BIOC 350	Molecular Basis of Cancer	3 Units	This course will examine the molecular basis of the initiation, progression, and treatment of cancer. We will accomplish this by examining the dysregulation of normal cellular processes involved in several common types of cancer from genotype to phenotype. We will also explore the techniques used to understand and detect cancer, the pharmacology of current therapies, FDA approved drugs and their targets, as well as a brief look at drug design. A second important aspect of this course is actively and critically engaging with the current scientific literature. Recent publications from high impact journals will be presented weekly to develop skills in interpretation and communication of the primary data and conclusions that build on and contribute to our current understanding of cancer. Offered as BIOC 350 and BIOC 450. Prereq: BIOC 307. Prereq or Coreq: BIOC 308.
BIOC 353	Biochemical Pathways in Cancer Therapeutics	3 Units	This is an advanced course that covers the biochemical mechanisms of action of major classes of common cancer therapeutics.  The course will start with a review of fundamental cellular and biochemical mechanisms relevant to the initiation and progression of cancer.  A common gastrointestinal cancer such as colon cancer, and a common hormone dependent cancer such as breast cancer, will be used as common threads during the rest of the course.  The role of biomarker testing in disease prevention, cancer diagnosis, and specific treatment design will be discussed.  The biochemical mechanisms of major classes of cancer therapeutics will be covered.  Examples of current treatment approaches using chemotherapeutic agents, hormones, and immunotherapy will be used.  Finally, emerging and developing new technologies and approaches in cancer screening and prevention, diagnosis, and treatment will be discussed. Offered ass BIOC 353 and BIOC 453. Prereq: BIOL 215 and (CHEM 223 or CHEM 323).
BIOC 354	Biochemistry and Biology of RNA	3 Units	Systematic overview of RNA biochemistry and biology. Course provides solid foundation for understanding processes of post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression. Topics include: RNA structure, RNA types, RNA-protein interactions, eukaryotic RNA metabolism including mRNA processing, ribosome biogenesis, tRNA metabolism, miRNA processing and function, bacterial RNA metabolism, transcriptomics. BIOC 454 requires an additional research proposal.  Recommended preparation for BIOC 354: Undergraduate Biology (1 semester minimum), equivalents of CHEM 301, BIOC 307 or BIOC 308. Offered as BIOC 354, BIOC 454 and CLBY 454. Prereq: CHEM 223, CHEM 224.
BIOC 360	Advanced Technologies for Cancer Research	3 Units	This course provides an overview of advanced technologies that are used by many laboratories to study the initiation, progression, and treatment of cancer. We accomplish this by providing lectures on advanced technologies (e.g., gene sequencing, proteomics, microscopy, and imaging) that are utilized routinely by both basic science and translational cancer investigators. We will present these technologies in a thematic format (e.g., advanced technologies in breast cancer research and therapy) to provide a more integrated learning environment. A secondary but equally important aspect of this course is actively and critically engaging with the current scientific literature. Recent publications from high impact journals will be presented weekly to develop skills in interpretation and communication of the primary data and conclusions that build on and contribute to our current understanding of these technologies and their respective roles in cancer research. Offered as BIOC 360 and BIOC 460. (Prereq: BIOC 307 and Coreq: BIOC 308) or Prereq: BIOL 114 or BIOL 116 or EBME 201.
BIOC 373	Biochemistry SAGES Seminar	3 Units	Discussion of current topics in biochemical research using readings from the scientific literature.  The goals are for the student: 1) to discuss and critically analyze selections from the biochemical literature; 2) to gain a broader understanding of important topics not formally covered in the didactic courses; and 3) to learn to write in the style of journals in the field of biochemistry. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: BIOC 307 and BIOC 308.  Restricted to majors in Biochemistry.
BIOC 391	Research Project	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.)  Offered on a pass/fail basis only.  Maximum 9 hours total credit.
BIOC 393	Senior Capstone Experience	3 Units	Students will complete their Capstone Projects, begun in BIOC 391.  Pertinent research activities will depend on the nature of the student's project.  The student will meet regularly with their Capstone adviser, at least twice monthly, to provide progress reports, discuss the project, and for critique and guidance.  By the end of this course, the student will have completed their SAGES Senior Capstone research project, written a project report in the form of a manuscript, and presented their project reports orally in the department and at the Senior Capstone Fair, or its equivalent. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: BIOC 307 and BIOC 308.
BIOC 393H	Biochemistry Honors Senior Capstone	3 Units	This course for students in the Biochemistry Honors Research track will fulfill the senior capstone requirement for students in the BA and BS programs. Students in this course will write an article describing their capstone research in the form of a scientific manuscript and make an oral presentation describing their results. Students will also write a short review article covering the area of scientific research in which they have been working. Open by permission to students in the Biochemistry Research Honors Track. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: BIOC 307 and BIOC 308.
BIOC 405	Principles of Biochemistry: An Introduction to the Molecules of Life	3 Units	This summer course provides an introduction to the macromolecules and small molecules that are the foundation of living systems. The focus is on mammalian biochemistry, with links to human biology and human disease. Topics include: protein structure and function; enzyme mechanisms, kinetics and regulation; membranes; hormone action; bioenergetics; intermediary metabolism, including pathways and regulation of carbohydrate, lipid, amino acid, and nucleotide biosynthesis and breakdown. One semester of biology is recommended. Suitable for students interested in careers in the health professions. This course is not open to undergraduate Biochemistry majors or Biochemistry graduate students. Prereq: CHEM 223 and CHEM 224.
BIOC 407	Introduction to Biochemistry: From Molecules To Medical Science	4 Units	Overview of the macromolecules and small molecules key to all living systems.  Topics include: protein structure and function; enzyme mechanisms, kinetics and regulation; membrane structure and function; bioenergetics; hormone action; intermediary metabolism, including pathways and regulation of carbohydrate, lipid, amino acid, and nucleotide biosynthesis and breakdown.  The material is presented to build links to human biology and human disease.  One semester of biology is recommended. Offered as BIOC 307 and BIOC 407. Prereq: CHEM 223 and CHEM 224.
BIOC 408	Molecular Biology	4 Units	An examination of the flow of genetic information from DNA to RNA to protein. Topics include: nucleic acid structure; mechanisms and control of DNA, RNA, and protein biosynthesis; recombinant DNA; and mRNA processing and modification. Where possible, eukaryotic and prokaryotic systems are compared. Special topics include yeast as a model organism, molecular biology of cancer, and molecular biology of the cell cycle. Current literature is discussed briefly as an introduction to techniques of genetic engineering. Recommended preparation: BIOC 307. Offered as BIOC 308 and BIOC 408.
BIOC 410	Microbial Physiology and Therapeutic Opportunities	3 Units	This course will cover the physiology and metabolic pathways of microbes, with a biomedical emphasis on bacteria and archaea and a brief discussion of fungi and other eukaryotic organisms. We will emphasize how physiological and metabolic characteristics can either be targeted (in the case of infectious disease) or utilized/exploited (in the case of, for instance, antibiotics and other bioactive natural products and fermentation products). Offered as BIOC 310 and BIOC 410.
BIOC 411	Antimicrobial Therapies and Resistance	3 Units	This course focuses on the biochemistry and molecular biology of antimicrobial compounds.  This includes antibiotics, the drugs clinically used to treat diseases caused by bacteria, antifungals, antiparasitic agents, and antivirals.  We will examine the history of antibiotic development; characteristics of chemicals used as antiseptics and disinfectants but unable to be used as therapies; and then survey synthetic and naturally-occurring antibiotic, antiviral, antifungal, and antiparasitic compounds. The biochemical mechanisms of action of different classes of each type of drug and mechanisms of resistance that have evolved over time will also be discussed.  Potential alternative therapies (e.g., phage therapy, antibodies, oligonucleotides) and preventatives (e.g., vaccines) will also be covered. Offered as BIOC 311 and BIOC 411.
BIOC 412	Proteins and Enzymes	3 Units	Aspects of protein and nucleic acid function and interactions are discussed, including binding properties, protein-nucleic acid interactions, kinetics and mechanism of proteins and enzymes, and macromolecular machines. Recommended Preparation: CHEM 301. Offered as BIOC 312 and BIOC 412.
BIOC 415	Biological Membranes and Their Proteins	3 Units	This course will focus on the architecture and maintenance of biological membranes and membrane proteins, with emphasis on eukaryotic cells. The theory and experimental evidence of the fluid mosaic model of membranes will be a core theme as we discuss the plasma membrane, Golgi apparatus, and endoplasmic reticulum as part of the eukaryotic protein secretion system. Dynamics of vesicle transit, exocytosis and endocytosis, and metabolism of membrane lipids will be discussed through this course. This course will also examine the structure and function of membrane proteins that maintain the plasma membrane's integrity, polarity, and permeability. This will include the mechanisms of active and passive transport of molecules and ions, and how dysregulation can cause disease. The mechanism and effect of drugs and toxins on specific membrane protein targets and the downstream consequences of the action of these compounds will also be considered throughout the course. Offered as BIOC 315 and BIOC 415.
BIOC 420	Current Topics in Cancer	3 Units	The concept of cancer hallmarks has provided a useful guiding principle in our understanding of the complexity of cancer. The hallmarks include sustaining proliferative signaling, evading growth suppressors, enabling replicative immortality, activating invasion and metastasis, inducing angiogenesis, resisting cell death, deregulating cellular energetics, avoiding immune destruction, tumor-promoting inflammation, and genome instability and mutation. The objectives of this course are to (1) examine the principles of some of these hallmarks, and (2) explore potential therapies developed based on these hallmarks of cancer. This is a student-driven and discussion-based graduate course. Students should have had some background on the related subjects and have read scientific papers in their prior coursework. Students will be called on to present and discuss experimental design, data and conclusions from assigned publications. There will be no exams or comprehensive papers but students will submit a one-page critique (strengths and weaknesses) of one of the assigned papers prior to each class meeting. The course will end with a full-day student-run symposium on topics to be decided jointly by students and the course director. Grades will be based on class participation, written critiques, and symposium presentations. Offered as BIOC 420, MBIO 420, PATH 422, and PHRM 420. Prereq: IBMS 453 and IBMS 455.
BIOC 432	Current Topics in Vision Research	3 Units	Vision research is an exciting and multidisciplinary area that draws on the disciplines of biochemistry, genetics, molecular biology, structural biology, neuroscience, and pathology.  This graduate level course will provide the student with broad exposure to the most recent and relevant research currently being conducted in the field.  Topics will cover a variety of diseases and fundamental biological processes occurring in the eye.  Regions of the eye that will be discussed include the cornea, lens, and retina.  Vision disorders discussed include age-related macular degeneration, retinal ciliopathies, and diabetic retinopathy.  Instructors in the course are experts in their field and are members of the multidisciplinary visual sciences research community here at Case Western Reserve University.  Students will be exposed to the experimental approaches and instrumentation currently being used in the laboratory and in clinical settings.  Topics will be covered by traditional lectures, demonstrations in the laboratory and the clinic, and journal club presentations.  Students will be graded on their performance in journal club presentations (40%), research proposal (40%), and class participation (20%).  Offered as NEUR 432, PATH 432, PHRM 432 and BIOC 432.
BIOC 434	Structural Biology	3 Units	Introduces the major techniques used to study high resolution three-dimensional structures of proteins, and their applications to biomedically-relevant problems.  Topics include the elucidation of protein structure by cryo-electron microscopy, X-ray crystallography, multidimensional NMR, and computational methods.   Offered as BIOC 334 and BIOC 434.
BIOC 444	Molecular Endocrinology	3 Units	A detailed biochemical examination of the hormonal signaling system of the human body and associated diseases. This includes mechanisms of glandular sensing and secretion, including metabolic signaling pathways (insulin and glucagon; leptin and ghrelin), the thyroid and thyroidisms, hypothalamus and pituitary gland, vitamin D and calcium homeostasis, among others. Molecular-level analysis of extra- and intra-cellular signaling pathways will be covered and critical differences in canonical pathways in specific tissue types will be emphasized. Additional topics will include amine neurotransmitters and affective disorders, steroid hormones and nuclear receptors, and circadian rhythm and sleep. Offered as BIOC 344 and BIOC 444.
BIOC 445	Metabolic Dysregulation and Human Disease	3 Units	A molecular examination of the processes and regulation of the synthesis of biomolecules, their mechanistic roles in human biochemistry, and how dysfunction of these processes can lead to disease. We will discuss the dynamic maintenance of chemical homeostasis and health, specifically in terms of cellular energy demands, redox balance, and detection and mitigation of foreign substances. The diseases caused by dysregulation and failure of these systems, and the current state of knowledge will be integrated throughout the course. The metabolically critical small molecules (B-vitamins, among others) and trace elements important to health will be discussed in regard to absorption, transport, deficiency, and toxicity; as well as enzyme mechanisms for which they are cofactors. We will also discuss weaknesses in current understanding of human-specific metabolism and controversial supplementation as student-led discussions and presentations. Offered as BIOC 345 and BIOC 445.
BIOC 450	Molecular Basis of Cancer	3 Units	This course will examine the molecular basis of the initiation, progression, and treatment of cancer. We will accomplish this by examining the dysregulation of normal cellular processes involved in several common types of cancer from genotype to phenotype. We will also explore the techniques used to understand and detect cancer, the pharmacology of current therapies, FDA approved drugs and their targets, as well as a brief look at drug design. A second important aspect of this course is actively and critically engaging with the current scientific literature. Recent publications from high impact journals will be presented weekly to develop skills in interpretation and communication of the primary data and conclusions that build on and contribute to our current understanding of cancer. Offered as BIOC 350 and BIOC 450. Prereq: BIOC 407. Prereq or Coreq: BIOC 408.
BIOC 452	Nutritional Biochemistry and Metabolism	3 Units	Mechanisms of regulation of pathways of intermediary metabolism; amplification of biochemical signals; substrate cycling and use of radioactive and stable isotopes to measure metabolic rates. Recommended preparation: BIOC 307 or equivalent. Offered as BIOC 452 and NTRN 452.
BIOC 453	Biochemical Pathways in Cancer Therapeutics	3 Units	This is an advanced course that covers the biochemical mechanisms of action of major classes of common cancer therapeutics.  The course will start with a review of fundamental cellular and biochemical mechanisms relevant to the initiation and progression of cancer.  A common gastrointestinal cancer such as colon cancer, and a common hormone dependent cancer such as breast cancer, will be used as common threads during the rest of the course.  The role of biomarker testing in disease prevention, cancer diagnosis, and specific treatment design will be discussed.  The biochemical mechanisms of major classes of cancer therapeutics will be covered.  Examples of current treatment approaches using chemotherapeutic agents, hormones, and immunotherapy will be used.  Finally, emerging and developing new technologies and approaches in cancer screening and prevention, diagnosis, and treatment will be discussed. Offered ass BIOC 353 and BIOC 453.
BIOC 454	Biochemistry and Biology of RNA	3 Units	Systematic overview of RNA biochemistry and biology. Course provides solid foundation for understanding processes of post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression. Topics include: RNA structure, RNA types, RNA-protein interactions, eukaryotic RNA metabolism including mRNA processing, ribosome biogenesis, tRNA metabolism, miRNA processing and function, bacterial RNA metabolism, transcriptomics. BIOC 454 requires an additional research proposal.  Recommended preparation for BIOC 354: Undergraduate Biology (1 semester minimum), equivalents of CHEM 301, BIOC 307 or BIOC 308. Offered as BIOC 354, BIOC 454 and CLBY 454.
BIOC 460	Advanced Technologies for Cancer Research	3 Units	This course provides an overview of advanced technologies that are used by many laboratories to study the initiation, progression, and treatment of cancer. We accomplish this by providing lectures on advanced technologies (e.g., gene sequencing, proteomics, microscopy, and imaging) that are utilized routinely by both basic science and translational cancer investigators. We will present these technologies in a thematic format (e.g., advanced technologies in breast cancer research and therapy) to provide a more integrated learning environment. A secondary but equally important aspect of this course is actively and critically engaging with the current scientific literature. Recent publications from high impact journals will be presented weekly to develop skills in interpretation and communication of the primary data and conclusions that build on and contribute to our current understanding of these technologies and their respective roles in cancer research. Offered as BIOC 360 and BIOC 460. Prereq: BIOC 407.  Coreq: BIOC 408.
BIOC 475	Protein Biophysics	3 Units	This course focuses on in-depth understanding of the molecular biophysics of proteins. Structural, thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of protein function and structure-function relationships will be considered at the advanced conceptual level. The application of these theoretical frameworks will be illustrated with examples from the literature and integration of biophysical knowledge with description at the cellular and systems level. The format consists of lectures, problem sets, and student presentations. A special emphasis will be placed on discussion of original publications.  Offered as BIOC 475, CHEM 475, PHOL 475, PHRM 475, and NEUR 475.
BIOC 500	Biotechnology Laboratory: Molecular Biology Basics	1 Unit	This course provides basic hands-on laboratory experience in molecular biology with a focus on handling and manipulating DNA in bacterial systems.  Specific topics include:  General laboratory safety, buffers, media, and other reagent preparation, sterile technique, transformation and culture of bacterial cells, DNA molecular biology techniques including DNA isolation and purification, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), restriction digests, ligation, agarose gel electrophoresis, and sequence analysis. Prereq: Biochemistry Graduate student or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOC 501	Biochemical and Cellular Techniques for Biotechnology	3 Units	This lecture course covers the basics of common, essential laboratory and analytical techniques used in biomedical research and the biotechnology industry. The course will cover recombinant protein production and characterization, mammalian cell culture, molecular and cell biology, and mass spectrometry.  Specific topics include: general laboratory safety, record keeping, preparation of research reports, manipulation of bacteria, protein overexpression and purification, enzyme assays, high-throughput techniques, high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and mass spectrometry, mammalian cell culture, Western blotting, protein-protein interactions, reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR), immunofluorescence microscopy and assays for gene expression.  This course is suitable for Biochemistry MS students interested in pursuing careers in academia or biotechnology.  It is also recommended for undergraduate students to enhance their technical skills and position them for productive research experiences. Graduate students in other programs within or outside the School of Medicine are permitted to enroll. Prereq: (BIOL 215L and CHEM 113) or Graduate standing.  Coreq: CHEM 233 or Graduate standing.
BIOC 502A	Biotechnology Laboratory	Molecular Biology and Biochemical Techniques	2 Units	This spring course provides hands-on laboratory experience in bacterial recombinant protein biochemistry and molecular and cell biology.   Specific topics include:  General laboratory safety, good laboratory practices (GLP), standard operating procedures (SOPs), buffers, media, and other reagent preparation, sterile technique, manipulation of bacterial cells, work with DNA including polymerase chain reaction (PCR), molecular cloning, and site-directed mutagenesis, protein overexpression and purification, enzyme activity and biophysical assays, DNA and protein gel electrophoresis, and high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).   This course, together with BIOC 502B and 502C, comprise a one-semester lab course that provides students with a comprehensive introduction to skills used in modern biotechnology laboratories.  Students may take one, two, or three of these courses in a single semester.  Suitable for biochemistry MS students interested in biotechnological and/or industry careers. All other graduate students and/or undergraduate students must contact the instructor for permission to enroll. Prereq: BIOC 500 and BIOC 501 or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOC 502B	Biotechnology Laboratory	Eukaryotic Molecular and Cellular Biology	2 Units	This spring course provides hands-on laboratory experience in mammalian cell culture and molecular and cell biology.   Specific topics include:  General laboratory safety, good laboratory practices (GLP), standard operating procedures (SOPs), buffers, media, and other reagent preparation, sterile technique, manipulation of  mammalian cells, mammalian cell culture, work with DNA and RNA, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques including quantitative reverse transcription (RT-qPCR) and molecular cloning, reporter assays, transfection, immunoprecipitation, immunofluorescence, and protein gel electrophoresis and blotting.   This course, together with BIOC 502A and 502C, comprise a one-semester lab course that provides students with a comprehensive introduction to skills used in modern biotechnology laboratories.  Students may take one, two, or three of these courses in a single semester.  Suitable for biochemistry MS students interested in biotechnological and/or industry careers. All other graduate students and/or undergraduate students must contact the instructor for permission to enroll. Prereq: BIOC 500 and BIOC 501 or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOC 502C	Biotechnology Laboratory	Mass Spectrometry Techniques	1 Unit	This spring course provides hands-on laboratory experience in mass spectrometry with an emphasis on biomolecules.   Specific topics include analysis of small molecules and biomolecules using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and mass spectrometry.  This course, together with BIOC 502A and 502B, comprise a one-semester lab course that provides students with a comprehensive introduction to skills used in modern biotechnology laboratories.  Students may take one, two, or three of these courses in a single semester.  Suitable for biochemistry MS students interested in biotechnological and/or industry careers. All other graduate students and/or undergraduate students must contact the instructor for permission to enroll. Prereq: BIOC 500 and BIOC 501 or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOC 511	Practice and Professionalism in Biotechnology	1 Unit	This course provides an overview of a variety of topics that are relevant to biotechnology research and development in academic and industrial settings.  It also provides an opportunity for students to develop professional written and oral communication skills.  Specific topics include:  Professional communications by email, letters, reports, and oral presentations; data documentation, security, and confidentiality; laboratory safety, certification, and regulation; intellectual property protection and patents; the drug discovery pipeline and approval process; financial aspects of research and development. Prereq:  Graduate Student in Biochemistry.
BIOC 528	Contemporary Approaches to Drug Discovery	3 Units	This course is designed to teach the students how lead compounds are discovered, optimized, and processed through clinical trials for FDA approval.  Topics will include: medicinal chemistry, parallel synthesis, drug delivery and devices, drug administration and pharmacokinetics, and clinical trials.  A special emphasis will be placed on describing how structural biology is used for in silico screening and lead optimization.  This component will include hands-on experience in using sophisticated drug discovery software to conduct in silico screening and the development of drug libraries.  Each student will conduct a course project involving in silico screening and lead optimization against known drug targets, followed by the drafting of an inventory disclosure.  Another important aspect of this course will be inclusion of guest lectures by industrial leaders who describe examples of success stories of drug development. Offered as BIOC 528, PHOL 528, PHRM 528, and SYBB 528.
BIOC 601	Biochemical Research	1 - 18 Units	Credit as arranged.
BIOC 611	Biochemistry Seminar I	1 Unit	Student presentations of topics from the current scientific literature unrelated to the student's research project. Participants are required to present a seminar.
BIOC 612	Biochemistry Seminar II	1 Unit	Discussion of current research.
BIOC 641	Proposition I	2 Units	Design of research proposal.
BIOC 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 6 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
BIOC 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
RLGN 101	Religion and Culture	3 Units	This course introduces students to the study of religion by examining religious practices within a variety of cultural and historical contexts around the world. The course invites students to think comparatively and critically about the role of religion within broader cultural discourses (e.g., gender, politics, and the environment). Instead of surveying what were formerly called the "world's great religions," this course builds religious literacy by examining religious practices within particular geographical and thematic areas. Through comparative case studies drawn from a diverse range of "non-western" cultures, students will learn about religions and spiritualities across the globe. These cultural touchstones will build core literacy in other cultures, positioning students to engage more fully in the religious and cultural diversity that they will encounter in their own lives and careers. Alongside these geographic case studies, the course will also examine key themes in the study of religion, such as diasporic transnationalism, liberation theology, and ritual practice. We will use these themes to tease out and debate some of the core theoretical and methodological challenges in the study of religion, including postcolonial critiques of the origin and history of the field of religious studies itself. To be clear, religion is our subject, not our approach. Although students will find opportunities to reflect on their own spirituality/disbelief, the course does not presume any particular religious or non-religious perspective. Indeed, the study of religion is itself concerned not only with the world's religious traditions, but also with contemporary questions of skepticism, science, disbelief, and secularity. Evaluation will be based on class preparation and participation, regular short papers, a midterm exam, and a final take-home essay exam. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 108	The History of Yoga: The Yoga of Transformation and the Transformation of Yoga	3 Units	In this class we will investigate the history and context of yoga.  We will first examine yoga as a transformative disciplined practice through close study of primary sources.  Next we will focus on Yoga as presented in Patanjall's Yoga Sutras.  We will then examine the ways and extent to which yoga has been transformed in both India and outside of India. To this end we will scrutinize the development of American(ized) "Yoga."  We will address the legal complexities concerning ownership and appropriation as well as those concerning the teaching of "Yoga" in public schools and the establishment clause of the First Amendment.  We will also devote several classes to actual yoga experiences where the students can learn some asana (postures) and movements. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 151	Introducing Africana Religions	3 Units	This "topics course" offers an introduction to the academic study of Africana Religions. Whether approached through a particular theme or as a general historical introduction, each section of this course provides students with a general introduction to the academic study of religion and basic religious literacy in religions of people of African origins in sub-Saharan African, the Caribbean, Europe, and the Americas and thus will explore forms of these traditions in a diversity of cultural contexts.  Section topics could include, but are not limited to:  Introducing Africana Religions: The Black Church in the U.S.,  Introducing Africana Religions: Yoruba Ifa Traditions, Introducing Africana Religions: Orisha Traditions in Latin America and the Caribbean,  Introducing Africana Religions: African American Religions,  Introducing Africana Religions: U.S. African-derived Religions.  Students may repeat the course for credit (up to 6 credits), provided that the two sections are different. Offered as AFST 151 and RLGN 151. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 153	Introducing Chinese Religions	3 Units	This "topics" course offers an introduction to the academic study of Chinese religions. Whether approached through a particular theme or as a general historical introduction, each section of this course provides students with a general introduction to the academic study of religion and a basic religious literacy in the nuances and complexities in Chinese religions within various historical and socio-cultural contexts.  Section topics might include, but are not limited to:   Confucianism, Daoism, Chinese Buddhism, Gender and Sexuality in Chinese Religions.  Students may repeat the course for credit once (two times total for 6 credits), provided that the two sections are different. Offered as RLGN 153, ETHS 153 and CHIN 253. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 154	Introducing Hinduism	3 Units	This "topics" course offers an introduction to the academic study of Hinduism. Whether approached through a particular theme or as a general historical introduction, each section of this course provides students with a general introduction to the academic study of religion and basic religious literacy in Hinduism, exploring forms of it in a diversity of cultural contexts. Section topics could include, but are not limited to:  The Epics, Ritual, Contemporary Practices.  Students may repeat the course for credit (up to 6 credits), provided that the two sections are different. Offered as RLGN 154 and WLIT 154. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 155	Introducing Jainism	3 Units	This "topics" course offers an introduction to the academic study of Jainism. Whether approached through a particular theme or as a general historical introduction, each section of this course provides students with a general introduction to the academic study of religion and basic religious literacy in Jainism exploring forms of it in a diversity of cultural contexts.  Section topics could include, but are not limited to:  Epics and Narratives, Ritual, Contemporary Issues.  Students may repeat the course for credit (up to 6 credits), provided that the two sections are different. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 171	Introducing Christianity	3 Units	This "topics" course offers an introduction to the academic study of Christianity. Whether approached through a particular theme or as a general historical introduction, each section of this course provides students with a general introduction to the academic study of religion and a basic religious literacy in Christianity, exploring forms of it in a diversity of cultural contexts throughout the world.  Section topics might include, but are not limited to:  The Black Church, The Apocalyptic Imagination, Latin American Liberation Theology.  Students may repeat the course for credit once (two times total for 6 credits), provided that the two sections are different. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 172	Introducing Islam	3 Units	This "topics" course offers an introduction to the academic study of the beliefs, practices, sacred texts, and intellectual traditions of Islam. Whether approached through a particular theme or as a general historical introduction, each section of this course provides students with a general introduction to the academic study of religion and basic religious literacy in Islamic tradition, including investigations into how Muslim institutions developed in relation to diverse socioeconomic and cultural conditions, including Africa, the Americas, the Middle East, and Europe.  Section topics could include, but are not limited to:  Women and Gender, Faith, Politics, and Modernity, Pilgrimages, Prophecy, and Sacred Places.  Students may repeat the course for credit (up to 6 credits), provided that the two sections are different. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 173	Introducing Judaism	3 Units	This "topics" course offers an introduction to the academic study of Judaism. Whether approached through a particular theme or as a general historical introduction, each section of this course provides students with a general introduction to the academic study of religion and basic religious literacy in Jewish religious tradition, exploring forms of it in a diversity of cultural contexts around the world.  Section topics could include, but are not limited to:  Festivals and Holy Days, Women and Gender, Jewish Ethics.  Students may repeat the course for credit (up to 6 credits), provided that the two sections are different. Offered as RLGN 173 and JDST 173. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 201	Interpreting Religion: Approaches and Current Issues	3 Units	Introduction to academic study of religion, exploring the history and development of the field, important theories and methodologies, and current issues, debates, and horizons of research. The course is foundational for majors and minors in religious studies but also open to other interested students who may find it valuable for their work in other fields of study. Particular readings and other assignments will be determined by the designated instructor.  Students are expected to attend class regularly, complete readings and other assignments, and participate actively in class discussions and other activities.
RLGN 203	Religious Studies for Future Healthcare Professionals	3 Units	This class will provide future healthcare professionals with the basic knowledge of religious studies and of topics pertaining to death and dying, sickness, suffering, and so on. Students will also gain a basic knowledge of related bioethical issues as they are found in the world's religions. The primary aim of the course is to offer future healthcare professionals an awareness of the diverse religious backgrounds of patients and issues that they might encounter and to provide a basic understanding of religious studies in the process. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 206	Religion and Ecology	3 Units	Historical and cross-cultural introduction to religious perspectives on nature and ecology, including Jewish, Christian, Hindu, Buddhist, and Native American texts and ritual practices.  Themes include: ecology of chaos and complexity, urban ecology, wilderness, and ecological crises. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 209	Introduction to Biblical Literature	3 Units	This course is an introduction to the academic study of biblical literature, including Hebrew Scriptures ("Old Testament") and the New Testament. The literature will be studied in light of both ancient and contemporary historical contexts, with a particular emphasis on the roles it plays in American culture and politics today.  Class sessions will be discussion oriented and will involve close, careful analysis and interpretation of texts.  No background in religion is necessary.  Evaluation will be based on class preparation and participation, regular short writing assignments, two exams, and a major paper.
RLGN 213	Jews and Judaism	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to Jewish religion, culture, history, and life.  It does not presuppose any previous study of Judaism or experience with Judaism, and it prepares students for additional coursework in Judaic studies, Jewish history, or religious studies with an emphasis on Judaism.  Required for the minor in Judaic Studies. Offered as JDST 101 and RLGN 213. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 215	Religion In America	3 Units	This course is an introduction to American religions, with a particular focus on religious diversity in the United States. As we examine the myriad beliefs and practices of America's religious communities, we will pay close attention to how religion and culture have shaped each other from the 1600's to today.  To explore the theme of religious diversity, we will take advantage of Cleveland's rich religious history with visits to local religious institutions and historical sites, including churches, mosques, synagogues and Hindu and Buddhist temples. Along the way we will consider the role of religious spaces and institutions in shaping community, identity, and politics in Northeast Ohio and beyond. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 216	Hinduism	3 Units	We will survey the basic beliefs and practices of Hinduism(s) as found in India and across the world, with an emphasis on primary sources and contemporary complexities. The class will focus on the religion(s) of cultures outside the United States. It will address in a substantive way ethnic, gender, sexual, religious, or other cultural practices outside the United States, so as to provide students with fresh perspectives on their own cultural assumptions, traditions, and experiences. Our study will range from close readings of classical texts, to observing and reflecting on contemporary practices and movies, to careful study of images and artifacts on display at the Cleveland Museum of Art. We will apply a variety of methods and tools to investigate class materials, from a number of different disciplines, including sociology, history, theology, anthropology, and psychology. Students will build a very strong foundation in the primary sources in this class. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 217	Buddhism	3 Units	Buddhism is an important world religion that originated in India around 500 BCE. Subsequently, Buddhism spread to Central and East Asia. More recently, Buddhist traditions have been established in Europe and North America. Like Christianity and Islam, Buddhism is considered a "missionary" religion because its message has been actively propagated in cultural contexts outside its place of origin. Buddhist ideas and concepts have not only inspired religious practice, but have often provided the foundation for political, social, ethical, literary, artistic and other modes of cultural expression. It is, therefore, difficult to understand those Asian cultures in which Buddhism is or has been important without understanding this religious tradition itself.  This course examines Buddhist thought and practice, with a focus on the Theravada and Mahayana Buddhist traditions that developed in India, and the spread and transformations of these traditions in south, southeast, and east Asia. We also consider Buddhist ethical perspectives. Course readings include translations of important Buddhist texts and contemporary scholarly interpretations of Buddhist ideas and practices. Visual and other media augment our study. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 218	Faith and Politics in Islam	3 Units	An overview of the relationship between Islam as a religion and Islam as a political system and the effect of this relationship on Islamic society from its origin to the present time. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 219	Islam in America	3 Units	The United States is home to one of the most diverse Muslim communities in the world. Using a variety of primary and secondary sources, this course examines the rich history of Islam in the United States, from the 18th century to the present, as it relates to key moments within American politics, religion and culture, and to transnational developments in Islamic thought and practice. We will also explore important issues within contemporary Muslim communities, including gender, shari'a, and religious pluralism. In addition to studying the experiences of Muslim immigrants, students will also investigate the vital role of African-American Muslims and converts in the development of American Muslim institutions, beliefs and rituals. This course will also introduce students to the history of Islam in Cleveland, and provide them with the opportunity to contribute to original research on Muslim communities in our city. Offered as AFST 219, HSTY 279, RLGN 219, and WGST 219. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 220	Jewish Art and Architecture	3 Units	Tradition and transformation in Jewish artistic expression over time and across space.  Course will begin with biblical period and continue down to the present day in Israel and America.  Examination of how concepts such as "Jewish" and "art" undergo change within the Jewish community over this period. Offered as ARTH 220, JDST 220, and RLGN 220. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 221	Indian Philosophy	3 Units	We will survey the origins of Indian philosophical thought, with an emphasis on early Buddhist, Hindu and Jain literature. Our concern will be the methods, presuppositions, arguments, and goals of these schools and trajectories of thought. What were their theories on the nature of the person, the nature of reality, and the nature and process of knowing? What were the debates between the schools and the major points of controversy? And, most importantly, are the positions/arguments internally incoherent? Offered as PHIL 221 and RLGN 221. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 227	Women, Gender, and Islam	3 Units	Women and gender are central to understanding Muslim societies, past and present. From debates about the veil to the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, gendered concerns have been especially prominent in contemporary debates about the status of Islam in the modern world. How have Muslim thinkers interpreted Islamic scriptures with respect to topics such as marriage, child custody, inheritance, and sexuality? How is masculinity and femininity constructed? In what ways do their interpretations reflect the political, economic, and social conditions in which they lived? How does gender structure authority and power in Muslim communities? How and why have Muslim women become so important in contemporary debates over religious and national identity around the world?   This course begins by examining the position of women and gender in the foundational Islamic texts, the Qur'an and Sunna (the practice of the Prophet Muhammad), and pre-modern interpretations of them.  Then we will explore marriage and divorce in Muslim jurisprudence, in order to examine themes such as women's spiritual capacities, female leadership, sexuality, and slavery. Next, we will turn to the headscarf as a lens though which to explore modern configurations of gender and sexuality, as they intersect with conceptions of national belonging, religious identity, and individual freedom. Finally, we will study contemporary debates over polygyny, homosexuality, and female religious authority.  There are no prerequisites for this course. No prior knowledge of Islam is expected. Offered as RLGN 227 and WGST 227. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 228	Asian Americans: Histories, Cultures, Religions	3 Units	This course introduces students to Asian American Studies as an interdisciplinary academic discipline. It critically examines the global and transnational dimensions of U.S. history, the constructions of "modernity" in the U.S., and the shaping of U.S. culture and religion, race and racialization, identity constructions and contestations, law and law-making, colonialism and empire building, labor and migration, politics and public policy making, and social movements through a critical study of Asian Americans and their diverse histories, cultures, religions, identity negotiations and contestations, social movements, and political activism. Offered as ETHS 228, HSTY 228 and RLGN 228. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 229	Asian Christianity: Historical Perspectives	3 Units	The history of Christianity in Asia is as old as the history of Christianity itself. But while much has been told about Christianity as it grew from an obscure Jewish sect to mighty Western Christendom, not enough attention has been given to the Christianity which spread eastwards to Asia in the first millennium of the Christian era. This course seeks to correct the imbalance by introducing students to a historical exploration of the eastward movement of Christianity from Jerusalem to different parts of Asia. Topics include the Assyrian Church of the East in Persia, India and China, European Catholic and Protestant colonial missions in the age of European imperialism, and the Jesuit missions to Japan and China. By the end of the semester, students should have a good grasp of the historical encounter of Christianity with the political, social, cultural and religious realities of Asia. Its dialogue and confrontation with these realities and the forces that led to its growth and decline. Offered as HSTY 229 and RLGN 229. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 230	Drugs, Religion, and Mystical Experiences	3 Units	This class examines the relationship between drugs, religion/religious traditions, and mystical experiences. While many religious traditions prohibit the use of alcohol, tobacco, or other drugs, many advocate the use of substances to achieve desired cognitive states, for spiritual or even medical/ therapeutic purposes. The class will look at several case studies, scientific papers, and philosophical monographs that pertain to, or provoke, these complexities. In this way we will problematize the categories "drug," "religion," "mystical experience."
RLGN 233	Introduction to Jewish Folklore	3 Units	Exploration of a variety of genres, research methods and interpretations of Jewish folklore, from antiquity to the present. Emphasis on how Jewish folk traditions and culture give us access to the spirit and mentality of the many different generations of the Jewish ethnic group, illuminating its past and informing the direction of its future development.   Offered as ANTH 233, RLGN 233, and JDST 233. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 234	The Ramayana: The Great Indian Epic	3 Units	The Ramayana, a 2000 year old Indian epic, is an intricate story of battling kings and demons, family loyalty and betrayal, romance, religion, and politics.  These stories create, store, and transmit cultural and religious values and icons for millions of people in India and other Asian and Southeast Asian nations.  Our study will range from close readings of the Ramayana, to observing and reflecting on contemporary practices, to careful study of images and artifacts on display at the Cleveland Museum of Art. We will apply a variety of methods and tools to investigate class materials, from a number of different disciplines, including sociology, history, theology, anthropology, and psychology. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 238	Alternative Altars: Folk Religion in America	3 Units	Taking a multidisciplinary approach, students will become familiar with the distinction between conventional and unconventional religions, with the history and personalities associated with new belief systems in America, and with the means, motivations and methods of generating faith communities.  Students will come to understand the role of cultural anxieties, new technologies, changing roles, globalization and other social tensions in the formation and duration of alternative altars. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 243	Bollywood and Social Justice: Contemporary Bollywood Movies with a Social Message	3 Units	India, where over-the-top, melodramatic films dominate, produces more than 1,000 films a year. With lavish action sequences punctuated by periodic songs in picturesque locales, these films, popularly referred to as Bollywood, traditionally have been known for depicting imaginary worlds, very far from reality. Among these are movies that are deeply immersed in issues of religion, religious conflict, caste, and social injustice. These issues range from ones concerning purity and the class system and Hindu-Muslim conflict, to women's rights and human trafficking. This class will be looking at a number of Bollywood films with focal points of matters pertaining to social justice. Students will learn about the foundations of these inequalities and intolerances so that they can more completely understand the themes addressed in the movies. The class will thus focus on the religion(s) of cultures outside the United States. It will address in a substantive way ethnic, gender, sexual, religious, or other cultural practices outside the United States, so as to provide students with fresh perspectives on their own cultural assumptions, traditions, and experiences. Offered as ETHS 243 and RLGN 243. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 251	Perspectives in Ethnicity, Race, Religion and Gender	3 Units	This course is designed to introduce students to the study of ethnicity.  Basic concepts such as race, gender, class, and identity construction will be examined.  Students are encouraged to use the tools and perspectives of several disciplines to address the experiences of ethnic groups in the United States. Offered as ETHS 251 and RLGN 251. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 252	Soul Murder: Religion and Sexual Abuse	3 Units	This seminar traces anthropological questions about religious-trauma, -memory, and -suffering through the lens of clergy sexual abuse. How is religious sexual abuse different than non-religious contexts? What can survivors teach us about the resilience of the human spirit? What are the racial dynamics of the recent Roman Catholic crisis? What flaws has it exposed in our criminal justice system?  To answer questions like these, we will (i) begin the semester with anthropological studies of religion and trauma. Then we will (ii) examine grand jury investigations in the United States. Prepared by these theoretical and historical texts, we will (iii) evaluate case studies from the Roman Catholic context, including sexual abuse by nuns. We will use these examples to evaluate (iv) representations of the crisis in film and news media. Finally, we will (v) compare the Catholic crisis to recent sexual abuse scandals in American Jewish, Muslim, and Protestant communities.  The comparative literature will include readings by Veena Das (cultural anthropology), Levinas (philosophy), Kathryn Lofton (religious studies), Timothy Lytton (law), Fortune (theology), and Frawley-O'Dea (psychology). Primary sources will include excerpts from special prosecutors and grand juries in Pennsylvania, Louisiana, and Massachusetts. Films will include "Doubt" and "Spotlight."  By the end of the course, students will: - Know how to research and critique the legal, spiritual, and theoretical consequences of religious sexual abuse. - Be able to debate multiple theories of religion and trauma. - Be able to analyze data that is emotionally difficult and legally complex.  Our seminars will include discussions, short writing assignments, collaborative work, and presentations. Offered as RLGN 252 and WGST 252. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 253	Religion and Philosophy in China	3 Units	This course critically examines the three principal religious and philosophical traditions of China: the Confucian, Daoist, and Chinese Buddhist traditions. Through a combination of assigned print and online readings, video clips and documentaries, class discussions, and written assignments, students explore the origins and historical developments, principal thinkers, central religious and doctrinal themes, ethics, spirituality, popular devotions, social movements, and contemporary developments of these three major religious and philosophical traditions of China. Students will consider the wider social, cultural, ethical, economic, and political dimensions of Chinese religions and philosophies generally, and themes of community and society, identity constructions, personal experiences, movements, as well as their socio-cultural reproductions in contemporary China, and where appropriate, the Chinese Diaspora in North America. Offered as CHIN 253C, ETHS 253C, PHIL 253 and RLGN 253. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 254	The Holocaust	3 Units	This class seeks to answer fundamental questions about the Holocaust: the German-led organized mass murder of nearly six million Jews and millions of other ethnic and religious minorities.  It will investigate the origins and development of racism in modern European society, the manifestations of that racism, and responses to persecution.  An additional focus of the course will be comparisons between different groups, different countries, and different phases during the Nazi era. Offered as HSTY 254, RLGN 254, ETHS 254, and JDST 254. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 255	Global Judaism: Diversity Across the Jewish World	3 Units	Scattered across the globe over the course of millennia, Jews' diverse histories and environments have given rise to a great range of religious, cultural and social forms. Using ethnographies as our primary texts, we will think critically and comparatively about Judaism and Jewishness in the Americas, Europe, Africa, and Asia.  Along our journey, we examine how Jews have navigated their experiences as minorities in their many diaspora homelands, and how they have they adapted their cultural and religious practices to the various environments in which they have found themselves.  In addition to exploring their Jewishness vis-à-vis others, we also examine questions of exclusion and belonging that Jews have faced as they have encountered each another in recent decades through tourism, mass migration, globalization, and the internet. How do the world's varied Jewish groups - who are of different skin colors, who speak different languages, and who carry different historical memories - navigate ethnic divides, race relations, and religious diversity? Should we speak of a single Jewish religion and Jewish people at all? Offered as ANTH 255, ETHS 255, JDST 255 and RLGN 255. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 260	Introduction to the Qur'an	3 Units	This course is an introduction to the Qur'an. For Muslims, the Qur'an is the inimitable word of God, and its influence has been both far-reaching and profound in various historical contexts. It introduces students to the text of the Qur'an, in English translation, providing a window into both Muslim interpretations of their scripture (from the early days of Islam to the present) and academic studies of the text. Students will approach the Qur'an as a living document, as text that is continually re-visited and re-interpreted by Muslims, and used in various ritual contexts and in daily life. This course will explore theological and legal dimensions of the Qur'an, touching on issues of God's nature, Islamic ethics, the foundations of Islamic law, and gender roles. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 268	Women in the Bible: Ethnographic Approaches to Rite and Ritual, Story, Song, and Art	3 Units	Examination of women in Jewish and Christian Biblical texts, along with their Jewish, Christian (and occasionally Muslim) interpretations. Discussion of how these traditions have shaped images of, and attitudes toward, women in western civilization. Offered as RLGN 268, WGST 268, and JDST 268.
RLGN 270	Introduction to Gender Studies	3 Units	This course introduces women and men students to the methods and concepts of gender studies, women's studies, and feminist theory.  An interdisciplinary course, it covers approaches used in literary criticism, history, philosophy, political science, sociology, anthropology, psychology, film studies, cultural studies, art history, and religion.  It is the required introductory course for students taking the women's and gender studies major. Offered as ENGL 270, HSTY 270, PHIL 270, RLGN 270, SOCI 201, and WGST 201. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
RLGN 272	Morality and Mind	3 Units	Recent research in cognitive science challenges ethical perspectives founded on the assumption that rationality is key to moral knowledge or that morality is the product of divine revelation.  Bedrock moral concepts like free will, rights, and moral agency also have been questioned.  In light of such critiques, how can we best understand moral philosophy and religious ethics?  Is ethics primarily informed by nature or by culture?  Or is ethics informed by both?  This course examines 1) ways in which cognitive science--and related fields such as evolutionary biology--impact traditional moral perspectives, and 2) how the study of moral philosophy and comparative ethics forces reconsideration of broad cognitive science theories about the nature of ethics.  The course examines the concept of free will as a case study in applying these interpretive viewpoints.  Interdisciplinary readings include literature from moral philosophy, religious ethics, cognitive science, and evolutionary biology.   Offered as COGS 272 and RLGN 272.
RLGN 278	Religion and Popular Culture	3 Units	How does religion function when it shows up in popular culture? How does popular culture influence and help shape religion? This "topics" course explores the interactions between religion and popular culture in contemporary society. Each section will focus on visual, kinetic, aural, haptic or literary "texts" that may include musical production, dance, film and television, social media, sports, video, visual and textile arts, traditional fiction or graphic novels. The course examines how religious traditions, symbols or concepts are evoked in popular cultural texts and how these texts create meaning and help shape individual and communal identity.  Each section will examine themes and issues that may include: gender, race, and sexuality; protest and activism, commercialism and consumerism; power and identity; ethics and morality; experience and embodiment; and constructions of evil, salvation, and transcendence. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 283	Muhammad: The Man and the Prophet	3 Units	The life of the Prophet Muhammad (c.470-632 CE) which was as crucial to the unfolding Islamic ideal as it is today.  An examination of how he attempted to bring peace to war-torn Arabia by evolving an entirely new perspective of the human situation, guidance for human lives, and humans' relationship with God.  The course will include Western perceptions of Islam, especially in light of September 11, 2001. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 284	Jesus Through Islamic Lens	3 Units	Christians are often surprised when they hear Muslims say, "We believe in Jesus too, and we hold him in great esteem."  But what do they really mean? Are the Muslim Jesus and the Christian Jesus the same person?                The primarily aim of this course is to introduce an image of Jesus little known outside the Arabic Islamic culture. It is an image that might be of interest to those who wish to understand how Jesus was perceived by a religious tradition which greatly revered him but rejected his divinity. Hence, the Jesus presented in this course will be similar in some ways to the Jesus in the Christian Gospels, in others not. Why and how this Muslim tradition of Jesus arose will be also discussed in this course.  Jesus Through Islamic Lens will draw from various Islamic texts to provide a comprehensive selection of excerpts pertaining to the life and moral teachings of Jesus. Approaching Christ from an Islamic perspective, this course will offer the students a rare opportunity to understand the significance of Jesus in Islam  and to gain a better understanding of the faith, not only as it contrasts with Christianity but also as it compares.   In this course we will try to respond to these questions: What role does Jesus have in Islam?  What does the Quran say about Him? What does it not say?  Why are Muslims repulsed by the idea that Jesus is the Son of God, fully God and fully man?  What do Muslims have in mind when they acknowledge Jesus as virgin-born?    This course also requires reading literature that pertains to the history of Islam, its theology and its culture, and because of its emphasis on an area of the world historically distinct from the West (or European culture), the course will fulfill the Global and Cultural Diversity requirement. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 302	The Lemonade Class: Religion, Race, Sex and Black Music	3 Units	Charles Long suggests that black musical forms are creative responses to the particular circumstances of black peoples' presence in the U.S and black notions of the sacred. In April of 2016, Beyoncé released her visual album Lemonade two days after the death of Prince. This course is organized around the album's title cuts and links these two artists together in an examination of religion and musical performance as creative response to the racial and gendered conditions of black life. The course investigates how both artists have used music as a platform to explore issues of race, gender, commerce, sexuality, power and divinity. The course also looks at examples from the works of earlier artists who address similar themes such as Ma Rainey, Bessie Smith, Muddy Waters, Billie Holiday, Nina Simone, Little Richard, James Brown, Marvin Gaye, and Aretha Franklin. Offered as AFST 302, ETHS 302, MUHI 316, RLGN 302, RLGN 402, and WGST 302. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 303	Multicultural Spain	Christian, Jewish and Muslim Coexistence	3 Units	Why is Medieval Iberia so often depicted as an example of tolerant multiculturalism? What constituted tolerance in the Middle Ages?  In what sense can we speak of medieval multiculturalism? Is Americo Castro's optimistic model of convivencia (coexistence) valid, or is Brian Catlos' idea of conveniencia (convenience) more accurate? In this course we will study cultural theory, medieval and modern historiography, and literature from medieval Castile to the present to approach an understanding of Medieval Iberian 'multiculturalism.'   This class will allow students to get in contact with the history of Spain through the study of the presence and influence of the Roman Empire, the Jewish and Muslim cultures and religions in the Peninsula. Through literature, cinema and art students will learn how the Spanish civilization and culture developed through the years.  The class will be offered during a regular semester, with a study abroad component at the end of it. Students will receive a handout about how to prepare for the class abroad. Offered as ARAB 303 and RLGN 303 and SPAN 301. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 308	Daoism: Visual Culture, History and Practice	3 Units	This course explores developments in the visual culture, history and practices of Daoist religious traditions in China from the third to twentieth centuries. Our historically and conceptually structured examination draws upon a balance of visual, textual, and material sources, while considering the various approaches scholars have employed to understand the history and development of Daoist traditions. Topics include: sacred scriptures and liturgies, biographies and visual narratives, iconography and functions of the pantheon of gods and immortals, views of the self and the body, practices of inner alchemy and self-cultivation, thunder deities and exorcism, dietetics and medicine and modes of meditation and ritual. Offered as ARTH 308, ARTH 408, and RLGN 308. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 312	The Mythical Trickster	3 Units	Few literary figures have as wide a distribution, and as long a history, as the mythical Trickster. He is at once sacred and profane, creator and destroyer; an incorrigible duper who is always duped. Free of social and moral restraints he is ruled instead by passions and appetites, yet it is through his unprincipled behavior that morals and values come into being. How are we to interpret this amazing creature? Using folkloristic theories and ethnographic methods, we will come to understand the social functions and symbolic meanings of the cross-cultural Trickster, over time and across space. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 314	Mythologies of the Afterlife	3 Units	This course provides a multidisciplinary approach to the idea of an afterlife, and its manifestation in diverse cultures.  We will examine the way varying views of the afterlife influence religion, popular culture and palliative care, and how human creativity has shaped the heavens, hells, hauntings and holidays of diverse populations over time and across space.  Students will come to see the afterlife as an integral part of human history and experience, not only because it helps people die with better hope, but because it helps them to live more richly.   Offered as RLGN 314 and JDST 314.
RLGN 315	Heresy and Dissidence in the Middle Ages	3 Units	Survey of heretical individuals and groups in Western Europe from 500 - 1500 A.D., focusing on popular rather than academic heresies.  The development of intolerance in medieval society and the problems of doing history from hostile sources will also be explored. Offered as HSTY 315 and RLGN 315. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 316	Christianity in China	3 Units	This course critically evaluates Christianity's long history in China, beginning with the "Luminous Religion" (Jingjiao) that was propagated by Assyrian Christian missionaries in Tang China (7th century CE), the missionary endeavors of Catholic and Protestant foreign missionaries and mission societies, the rise of indigenous Chinese Christianities that sought independence from foreign missionaries, the impact of communist rule and the Cultural Revolution, and current developments involving both the official government-approved churches (i.e., the Three Self Patriotic Movement and the Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association) on the one hand, and the house church movement (jiating jiaohui) on the other hand. Students will critically discuss and analyze the historical dimensions of Christianity's presence in China and engagement with various social, cultural, political, philosophical, and religious aspects of Chinese society, past and present, and consider the implications of emergent forms of contemporary indigenous Chinese Christian movements for the future of Chinese Christianity. Offered as RLGN 316, RLGN 416, HSTY 322, CHIN 316 and ETHS 326. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 319	The Crusades	3 Units	This course is a survey of the history of the idea of "crusade," the expeditions of Western Europeans to the East known as crusades, the Muslim and Eastern Christian cultures against which these movements were directed, as well as the culture of the Latin East and other consequences of these crusades. Offered as HSTY 319 and RLGN 319. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 320	Gods and Demons in the Ancient Near East and Egypt	3 Units	The roots of many modern religious, literary, social, and political notions reach deep into the fertile soil of Ancient Near Eastern and Egyptian cultures, which developed as early as the fourth millennium BCE and flourished until the Hellenistic period. In this course we will examine various components of the religious, divinatory and magical systems of these cultures, and reflect upon their relationship with the stories that are found in the Hebrew Bible. We will learn (through a critical analysis of a selection of ancient texts) about ancient Mesopotamian and Egyptian deities, demons, myths, and magical rituals. We will also explore notions of creation, cosmic order, the human condition, death, afterlife, divine favor, and a wide variety of beliefs that, while often contradictory to modern ways of thinking, combined into unified religious systems. Offered as ANEE 320, RLGN 320 and RLGN 420.
RLGN 326	Religion, Global Health, and Human Rights	3 Units	Global Health is an interdisciplinary field concerned with improving health and achieving equity in health for all people, worldwide, focusing on transnational health issues, identifying determinants, and proposing solutions. This course examines issues in global health and human rights and considers the contributions religious ethics may make in analyzing and evaluating such issues. In the first half of the course, we will familiarize ourselves with theoretical issues including what a human right is, whether there's a human right to health, what socially determines health, and how religion relates to global health. In the second half the course, we will turn to practical issues in global health: women, maternal, and reproductive health; neonatal and pediatric health; access to medication and the right to health; emergency relief and humanitarian aid; and access to freshwater. We will conclude by considering the future of global health. Over the course of the semester, we will also become familiar with religious ethics and the relationship among religious ethics, global health, and human rights. In doing so, students will learn about the foundations for religion, global health, and human rights as they intersect with care for individuals and communities in our interconnected and globalized world. Offered as RLGN 326, RLGN 426, PHIL 326 and PHIL 426. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 333	Philosophy of Religion	3 Units	Topics include: classical and contemporary arguments for God's existence; divine foreknowledge and human freedom; the problem of evil and theodicy; nature and significance of religious experience; mysticism; varieties of religious metaphysics; knowledge, belief and faith; nature of religious discourse. Readings from traditional and contemporary sources. Recommended preparation for PHIL 433 and RLGN 433: PHIL 101 or RLGN 102. Offered as PHIL 333, RLGN 333, PHIL 433, and RLGN 433. Prereq: PHIL 101 or RLGN 102.
RLGN 341	Power of Words: Ritual Uses of Premodern Japanese Literature	3 Units	In premodern Japan, it was not only death and mourning ritual and practice that could pacify the spirit of the deceased, but also language. Authors consciously crafted the words of their works to simultaneously express the grief associated with longing and pacify the spirits of the dead. These words are called kotodama (power of words). From as far back as the eighth-century Kojiki (Records of Ancient Matters) and Nihon Shoki (The Chronicles of Japan) textual representations of mourning were linked with special uses of language and spirit pacification. At the death of Ame-no-wakahiko (a mythological god), his parents constructed a mourning hut and performed songs to secure his spirit in the afterworld. As several authors have demonstrated, from kotodama in the mid-eighth-century poetic anthology Man'y'sh, (Collection of Ten Thousand Leaves) to linked verse (renga) in medieval Japan, carefully constructed literary language also had a place in ritual pacification of the spirits of the dead. Words were not simple expressions of grief; they held power.  All material is in English translation. The course is conducted in English. All material will be provided via PDF. Offered as JAPN 341 and WLIT 341 and RLGN 341. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 348	Buddhism and Cognitive Science	3 Units	In 1987, the Dalai Lama initiated a yearly event--Mind and Life Dialogues--to address "critical issues of modern life at the intersection of scientific and contemplative understanding". Dialogue topics included issues related to Buddhist thought and practice, and cognitive science. Others with an interest in the intersection of Buddhism and cognitive science, such as Robert Wright in Why Buddhism is True: The Science and Philosophy of Meditation and Enlightenment (2017), argue that non-supernatural aspects of Buddhism, such as the benefits of mindfulness meditation and the nature of the (non-)self, are affirmed by cognitive science and evolutionary psychology. The notion that at least some aspects of Buddhism are "true" in relation to contemporary cognitive scientific views of mind and brain has attracted considerable attention from both Buddhist practitioners and cognitive scientists. This seminar explores Buddhist and cognitive science perspectives on issues such as embodied cognition, consciousness, mind, self and personal identity, theory of mind, morality, representation, and language. We start with a general overview of Buddhist philosophy, and then turn to specific readings on Buddhist concepts in relation to similar concepts found in the cognitive science literature. For instance, we will explore the Buddhist concept of no permanent self or soul (an-tman). This idea resonates with Daniel Dennett's notion of the "narrative self" and the cognitive neuroscience view that there is no neurological center of self or experience. Although the specific concepts covered will vary in each iteration of this course, readings will always be drawn from both Buddhist primary and secondary readings, and from the cognitive science literature. Offered as COGS 348, COGS 448, RLGN 348 and RLGN 448. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Completion of one COGS or RLGN course or Requisites Not Met permission.
RLGN 353	Hindu and Jain Bioethics: Special Focus on Women's and Gender Studies	3 Units	This course will provide both an introduction to basic Hinduism and Jainism and an introduction to Hindu and Jain bioethics. We will focus primarily on bioethical issues that pertain to women and that are gender related. These issues include abortion, menstruation, surrogacy, intersex, and other topics of controversy.  Offered as ETHS 353, RLGN 353, RLGN 453, and WGST 355. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 357	Christian Bioethics	3 Units	Bioethics is concerned with both clinical and population level healthcare issues. Christian Bioethics aims to integrate the discipline of theology with the field of bioethics to critically evaluate the goals of healthcare and the practices associated with these goals. This course examines the theological sources used to evaluate contemporary clinical and population level healthcare issues. We will examine issues including abortion, end-of-life care, genetic enhancement, the concept of disability, health inequalities and justice, and personal and social responsibility for health, especially as these relate to political and social justice. We will also become familiar with religious moral reasoning and the relationship between religious ethics and nonreligious moral and political philosophy. In doing so, students will learn about the foundations for religion, medicine, and ethics as they intersect with care for individuals and communities. Offered as BETH 357, BETH 457, PHIL 357, PHIL 457, RLGN 357 and RLGN 457.
RLGN 371	Jews Under Islam and Christianity	3 Units	This course examines the social and political status of Jews under Muslim and Christian rule since the Middle Ages.  Themes include interfaith relations, Islamic and Christian beliefs regarding the Jews, Muslim and Christian regulation of Jewry, and the Jewish response. Offered as HSTY 371, JDST 371 and RLGN 371. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 372	Anthropological Approaches to Religion	3 Units	The development of, and current approaches to, comparative religion from an anthropological perspective.  Topics include witchcraft, ritual, myth, healing, religious language and symbolism, religion and gender, religious experience, the nature of the sacred, religion and social change, altered states of consciousness, and evil.  Using material from a wide range of world cultures, critical assessment is made of conventional distinctions such as those between rational/irrational, natural/supernatural, magic/religion, and primitive/civilized. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102. Offered as ANTH 372, RLGN 372 and ANTH 472.
RLGN 373	History of the Early Church: First Through Fourth Centuries	3 Units	Explores the development of the diverse traditions of Christianity in the Roman Empire from the first through the fourth centuries C.E. A variety of New Testament and extra-Biblical sources are examined in translation. Emphasis is placed on the place of Christianity in the larger Roman society, and the variety of early Christian ideals of salvation, the Church, and Church leadership. Offered as HSTY 303 and RLGN 373. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 388	Topics in Religion	3 Units	Critical assessment of selected topics of historical or current interest. Project must be accepted by a member of the department faculty prior to registration. Offered as RLGN 388 and RLGN 488.
RLGN 392	Independent Study	1 - 3 Units	Up to three semester hours of independent study may be taken in a single semester.  Must have prior approval of faculty member directing the project.
RLGN 394	Honors Research I	3 Units	Intensive study of a topic or problem leading to the writing of an honors thesis.  Requires RLGN 102 plus 9 RLGN credits and department approval. Prereq: RLGN 102 plus 9 RLGN credits.
RLGN 395	Honors Research II	3 Units	Intensive study of a topic or problem leading to the writing of an honors thesis. By department approval only. Prereq: RLGN 394 and by departmental approval.
RLGN 399	Major/Minor Seminar	3 Units	Capstone course primarily for majors and minors in religious studies. Allows students to interact with peers and faculty, reflect critically, and integrate their learning experiences. Prepares students to continue their learning in the discipline and in the liberal arts. Subject matter varies according to student and faculty needs and perspectives. May be repeated once for up to six credit hours. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: RLGN 201.
RLGN 400	Foundational Readings in Religious Studies	3 Units	Structured as an Independent Study, this course is meant to familiarize the student with the major classical works and thinkers that have shaped the modern field of Religious Studies.  Students will meet on a regular basis with the Instructor to discuss the theories and methods described in the literature.
RLGN 402	The Lemonade Class: Religion, Race, Sex and Black Music	3 Units	Charles Long suggests that black musical forms are creative responses to the particular circumstances of black peoples' presence in the U.S and black notions of the sacred. In April of 2016, Beyoncé released her visual album Lemonade two days after the death of Prince. This course is organized around the album's title cuts and links these two artists together in an examination of religion and musical performance as creative response to the racial and gendered conditions of black life. The course investigates how both artists have used music as a platform to explore issues of race, gender, commerce, sexuality, power and divinity. The course also looks at examples from the works of earlier artists who address similar themes such as Ma Rainey, Bessie Smith, Muddy Waters, Billie Holiday, Nina Simone, Little Richard, James Brown, Marvin Gaye, and Aretha Franklin. Offered as AFST 302, ETHS 302, MUHI 316, RLGN 302, RLGN 402, and WGST 302. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 416	Christianity in China	3 Units	This course critically evaluates Christianity's long history in China, beginning with the "Luminous Religion" (Jingjiao) that was propagated by Assyrian Christian missionaries in Tang China (7th century CE), the missionary endeavors of Catholic and Protestant foreign missionaries and mission societies, the rise of indigenous Chinese Christianities that sought independence from foreign missionaries, the impact of communist rule and the Cultural Revolution, and current developments involving both the official government-approved churches (i.e., the Three Self Patriotic Movement and the Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association) on the one hand, and the house church movement (jiating jiaohui) on the other hand. Students will critically discuss and analyze the historical dimensions of Christianity's presence in China and engagement with various social, cultural, political, philosophical, and religious aspects of Chinese society, past and present, and consider the implications of emergent forms of contemporary indigenous Chinese Christian movements for the future of Chinese Christianity. Offered as RLGN 316, RLGN 416, HSTY 322, CHIN 316 and ETHS 326. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 420	Gods and Demons in the Ancient Near East and Egypt	3 Units	The roots of many modern religious, literary, social, and political notions reach deep into the fertile soil of Ancient Near Eastern and Egyptian cultures, which developed as early as the fourth millennium BCE and flourished until the Hellenistic period. In this course we will examine various components of the religious, divinatory and magical systems of these cultures, and reflect upon their relationship with the stories that are found in the Hebrew Bible. We will learn (through a critical analysis of a selection of ancient texts) about ancient Mesopotamian and Egyptian deities, demons, myths, and magical rituals. We will also explore notions of creation, cosmic order, the human condition, death, afterlife, divine favor, and a wide variety of beliefs that, while often contradictory to modern ways of thinking, combined into unified religious systems. Offered as ANEE 320, RLGN 320 and RLGN 420.
RLGN 426	Religion, Global Health, and Human Rights	3 Units	Global Health is an interdisciplinary field concerned with improving health and achieving equity in health for all people, worldwide, focusing on transnational health issues, identifying determinants, and proposing solutions. This course examines issues in global health and human rights and considers the contributions religious ethics may make in analyzing and evaluating such issues. In the first half of the course, we will familiarize ourselves with theoretical issues including what a human right is, whether there's a human right to health, what socially determines health, and how religion relates to global health. In the second half the course, we will turn to practical issues in global health: women, maternal, and reproductive health; neonatal and pediatric health; access to medication and the right to health; emergency relief and humanitarian aid; and access to freshwater. We will conclude by considering the future of global health. Over the course of the semester, we will also become familiar with religious ethics and the relationship among religious ethics, global health, and human rights. In doing so, students will learn about the foundations for religion, global health, and human rights as they intersect with care for individuals and communities in our interconnected and globalized world. Offered as RLGN 326, RLGN 426, PHIL 326 and PHIL 426. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 433	Philosophy of Religion	3 Units	Topics include: classical and contemporary arguments for God's existence; divine foreknowledge and human freedom; the problem of evil and theodicy; nature and significance of religious experience; mysticism; varieties of religious metaphysics; knowledge, belief and faith; nature of religious discourse. Readings from traditional and contemporary sources. Recommended preparation for PHIL 433 and RLGN 433: PHIL 101 or RLGN 102. Offered as PHIL 333, RLGN 333, PHIL 433, and RLGN 433.
RLGN 448	Buddhism and Cognitive Science	3 Units	In 1987, the Dalai Lama initiated a yearly event--Mind and Life Dialogues--to address "critical issues of modern life at the intersection of scientific and contemplative understanding". Dialogue topics included issues related to Buddhist thought and practice, and cognitive science. Others with an interest in the intersection of Buddhism and cognitive science, such as Robert Wright in Why Buddhism is True: The Science and Philosophy of Meditation and Enlightenment (2017), argue that non-supernatural aspects of Buddhism, such as the benefits of mindfulness meditation and the nature of the (non-)self, are affirmed by cognitive science and evolutionary psychology. The notion that at least some aspects of Buddhism are "true" in relation to contemporary cognitive scientific views of mind and brain has attracted considerable attention from both Buddhist practitioners and cognitive scientists. This seminar explores Buddhist and cognitive science perspectives on issues such as embodied cognition, consciousness, mind, self and personal identity, theory of mind, morality, representation, and language. We start with a general overview of Buddhist philosophy, and then turn to specific readings on Buddhist concepts in relation to similar concepts found in the cognitive science literature. For instance, we will explore the Buddhist concept of no permanent self or soul (an-tman). This idea resonates with Daniel Dennett's notion of the "narrative self" and the cognitive neuroscience view that there is no neurological center of self or experience. Although the specific concepts covered will vary in each iteration of this course, readings will always be drawn from both Buddhist primary and secondary readings, and from the cognitive science literature. Offered as COGS 348, COGS 448, RLGN 348 and RLGN 448. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Completion of one COGS or RLGN course or Requisites Not Met permission.
RLGN 453	Hindu and Jain Bioethics: Special Focus on Women's and Gender Studies	3 Units	This course will provide both an introduction to basic Hinduism and Jainism and an introduction to Hindu and Jain bioethics. We will focus primarily on bioethical issues that pertain to women and that are gender related. These issues include abortion, menstruation, surrogacy, intersex, and other topics of controversy.  Offered as ETHS 353, RLGN 353, RLGN 453, and WGST 355. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RLGN 457	Christian Bioethics	3 Units	Bioethics is concerned with both clinical and population level healthcare issues. Christian Bioethics aims to integrate the discipline of theology with the field of bioethics to critically evaluate the goals of healthcare and the practices associated with these goals. This course examines the theological sources used to evaluate contemporary clinical and population level healthcare issues. We will examine issues including abortion, end-of-life care, genetic enhancement, the concept of disability, health inequalities and justice, and personal and social responsibility for health, especially as these relate to political and social justice. We will also become familiar with religious moral reasoning and the relationship between religious ethics and nonreligious moral and political philosophy. In doing so, students will learn about the foundations for religion, medicine, and ethics as they intersect with care for individuals and communities. Offered as BETH 357, BETH 457, PHIL 357, PHIL 457, RLGN 357 and RLGN 457.
RLGN 488	Topics in Religion	3 Units	Critical assessment of selected topics of historical or current interest. Project must be accepted by a member of the department faculty prior to registration. Offered as RLGN 388 and RLGN 488.
RLGN 601	Special Research	1 - 6 Units	Project must be accepted by a member of the department faculty prior to registration. Prereq: Graduate standing.
RLGN 651	Thesis M.A.	1 - 9 Units	Project must be accepted by a member of the department faculty prior to registration.
REMA 261	Preclinical Orthodontics	1 Unit	Sophomore orthodontics includes relevant areas of applied growth and development, diagnostic methods and treatment planning. Topics included are: Histology and Physiology of Tooth movement and Laboratory Techniques related to the fabrication and use of suitable orthodontic appliances including material and biologic background necessary for proper clinical management of these appliances.
REMA 270	Introduction to Pediatrics	1 Unit	Students will learn principles and practices of modern dental care for children including diagnostic, preventive, and treatment procedures applied to dental caries, periodontal disease, malocclusion, growth and development in children. In caring for the child patient, this course emphasizes current concepts of behavior guidance of children in the dental treatment setting.
REMA 327	Non-Surgical Periodontal Therapy Intensive	2 Units	This course focuses on introduction, from pre-clinical to clinical phase, of periodontal non-surgical therapy. There will be a didactic and hands-on component. The didactic component will be dedicated to examination, diagnosis, prognosis, risk assessment and treatment planning of the periodontal patient. The hands-on component will include patient examination, charting, ultrasonic and sonic instrumentation, hand instrumentation, and clinical case discussion.
REMA 380	Introduction to Geriatric Dentistry	1 Unit	This course focuses on the study of aging in the population and its effects on treatment planning and actual dental treatment of geriatric patients from well to frail.  Didactic instruction and case presentations would cover a wide variety of medically compromising conditions, physical disabilities and sensory impairments.  The effects of these conditions as they pertain to dentistry will be discussed together with economic, social and community variables that need to be addressed to achieve rational dental care.
REHE 120	Introduction to Radiography	1.5 Unit	Foundation course consisting of lectures and laboratory covering basic principles of radiography. Included are: instructions on taking intraoral radiographs, radiation physics involved in x-ray generation and the parts and function of the x-ray unit, radiation biology of x-ray interaction with tissue, head and neck anatomy and pathology with regards to radiographic interpretation. Each student will have clinic rotations.
REHE 151	Dental Anatomy	3 Units	The didactic portion of the course describes the anatomy of the masticatory structures with an emphasis on teeth, deciduous and permanent.
REHE 152	Basic Procedures in Fixed Prosthodontics	1 Unit	This course will develop and build core elements vital to Fixed Prosthodontics, specifically related to single unit restoration. The course will place an emphasis on the following topics: clinical indications and application of the single unit restoration, principles of engineering of abutment preparations, preparation designs, soft tissue management, provisional and definitive restorative materials, clinical progression and treatment sequence for the cementation of provisional and definitive fixed partial denture.
REHE 153	Dental Anatomy Laboratory	1 Unit	In the laboratory, students will develop the psychomotor skills necessary to reproduce the functional morphology of permanent teeth.
REHE 154	Basic Procedures in Fixed Prosthodontics Lab	1 Unit	Laboratory component of REHE 152.
REHE 156	DentSim Laboratory	1 Unit	This course covers the criteria, techniques and practice of preparing 'ideal/standard' operative preparations.  The restorative procedures will be performed on typodont teeth mounted in a computer assisted simulator (DentSim).
REHE 158	Dental Materials I	.5 Unit	This is a didactic course that defines and describes properties, composition, indications and contraindications of used of different dental materials.
REHE 162	Basic Procedures in Restorative Dentistry I	.5 Unit	This course introduces students to the criteria, the techniques for, and practice of preparing 'ideal/standard' Class I and V (and possibly Class II) operative preparations. In this course, the emphasis will be on the more traditional posterior amalgam Class I and V preparations. Students will be introduced to basic concepts of preparation design and amalgam restorations. In addition, the composition and properties of amalgam will be mentioned (however, the Dental Materials I Course will provide the basic information regard this material.) The restorative procedures will be performed on typodont teeth mounted in a simulator. The emphasis will be on traditional preparation design and execution.
REHE 172	Basic Procedures in Restorative Dentistry I Lab	1 Unit	Laboratory component of REHE 162.
REHE 252	Pain Control	1 Unit	This course consists of lectures, demonstrations and clinical participation for the undergraduate dental student to become informed and trained in the safe and effective use of local anesthetics in dentistry.  The students will also learn the pharmacology and clinical application of these agents in the control of pain and anxiety.
REHE 253	Basic Procedures in Esthetics	1 Unit	This course provides formal lecture presentations and laboratory exercises to introduce the students to basic operative procedures for direct composite resin restorations.
REHE 254	Pharmacology	4 Units	This course is a basic introduction to the principles of pharmacology and to drug classes of particular relevance to dentistry. Drugs used in other medical areas will also be reviewed. Information concerning drug doses is NOT included. Information concerning calculations used in determining doses WILL BE included.
REHE 256	Radiologic Interpretation	1 Unit	Follow-up course to Introduction to Radiography, with a primary focus on Radiographic Interpretation, consisting of lecture and laboratory covering basic principles of radiography, interpretation and diagnosis. Each student will have a clinic rotation.
REHE 257	Prosthodontic Technology	2 Units	The didactic portion of the course relates not only the theory of complete denture construction, but also the human elements that are involved.  This includes the physical dental examination, evaluation of the patient's needs and descriptions of the various procedures needed to successfully rehabilitate an edentulous patient.
REHE 258	Principles of Treatment Planning I	1 Unit	This course provides an advanced teaching concept called Flipped Classroom. The flipped classroom is a teaching module model in which the typical lecture and homework elements of a course are reversed. Short video lectures are viewed by students at home before class sessions, while in-class time is devoted to exercises, projects, or discussions (we refer to these as LEARNING MODULES). The video lecture is often seen as the key ingredient in the flipped approach. Such lectures are created by the instructor and posted online.
REHE 259	Basic Procedures in Fixed Prosthodontics II	1 Unit	This course builds upon those core elements covered in REHE 152/154.  Emphasis on principles of engineering for fixed partial dentures, preparation and design of fixed partial dentures, considerations for the restoration of endodontically involved teeth, and definitive and provisional fixed partial denture restorations.  Introduces dental material topics related to fabrication of a fixed partial denture restoration, including: chemicomechanical soft tissue retraction, die spacers, investments, casting and casting alloys, ceramics, soldering, provisional materials, prefabricated and custom post and core systems.  Emphasis on principles of engineering for fixed partial dentures, preparation and design of fixed partial dentures, considerations for the restoration of endodontically involved teeth, and definitive and provisional fixed partial denture restorations.  Introduces dental material topics related to fabrication of a fixed partial denture restoration, including: chemicomechanical soft tissue retraction, die spacers, investments, casting and casting alloys, ceramics, soldering, provisional materials, prefabricated and custom post and core systems.
REHE 260	Basic Procedures in Fixed Prosthodontics III	.5 Unit	This course builds upon those core elements covered in REHE 152/154 and REHE 259/269. Emphasis on principles of engineering for fixed partial dentures, preparation and design of fixed partial dentures, considerations for the restoration of endodontically involved teeth, and definitive and provisional fixed partial denture restorations. Introduces dental material topics related to fabrication of a fixed partial denture restoration, including: chemicomechanical soft tissue retraction, die spacers, investments, casting and casting alloys, ceramics, soldering, provisional materials, prefabricated and custom post and core systems. Emphasis on principles of engineering for fixed partial dentures, preparation and design of fixed partial dentures, considerations for the restoration of endodontically involved teeth, and definitive and provisional fixed partial denture restorations. Introduces dental material topics related to fabrication of a fixed partial denture restoration, including: chemicomechanical soft tissue retraction, die spacers, investments, casting and casting alloys, ceramics, soldering, provisional materials, prefabricated and custom post and core systems.
REHE 262	Basic Procedures in Restorative Dentistry II	1 Unit	This course, together with the first year Intro to BP Operative Dentistry and the BP Esthetic Dentistry Course covers the criteria, the techniques for, and practice of preparing 'ideal/standard' operative preparations and placement of operative restorations.  In this portion of the course, the emphasis will be on posterior Class II amalgam preparations and restorations, as well as an introduction to cast gold inlay and onlays, and an introduction to CEREC (CEramic REConstruction) Onlays.  Students will be introduced to basic cariology and radiology as it relates to operative dentistry.  In addition, the composition and properties of the following materials will be reviewed: amalgam, liners and bases, and gold.  The Dental Materials Course will provide the basic information regarding these materials.  The restorative procedures will be performed primarily on typodont teeth mounted in a simulator.  Extracted teeth with caries will also help students appreciate the different tactile responses of caries, dentin and enamel.  There will be an emphasis on the following: the rationale for types of preparations and materials, indications and contraindications for different materials and types of restorations, and clinical problem solving related to operative dentistry in total treatment care.
REHE 263	Basic Procedure i	Esthetics Lab	.5 Unit	Preclinical component of REHE 253. Basic Procedures in Esthetic Dentistry.
REHE 264	Endodontics	.5 Unit	The didactic and preclinical curriculum covered in endodontics in REHE 264 and followed in DSRE 391 provides the major endodontic treatment information for this program. Specific subjects covered are diagnosis, pulp and periapical pathosis, radiology, pharmacology, anesthesia, pain management, emergency treatment, pulp treatment, trauma, mechanical innovations, apexification, bleaching, endodontic-periodontal complexities, preparation of endodontically treated teeth, and endodontic surgery. The above information is designed to provide the student with a basic understanding of the field of endodontics.
REHE 266	Partial Denture Design	3 Units	This course covers the second subcategory of removable dentures with the Complete Dentures course REHE 257/267. The title "Removable Partial Denture Technology" in fact covers a very vast field of skills and knowledge required for the fabrication of a removable partial denture in collaboration with the dental laboratory and the dentist. Its preliminary assessment and diagnostic requirements make it very close to oral diagnostic sciences; preprosthetic radiographic, surgical, periodontal and endodontic considerations make it very close to these disciplines as much as it is a restorative/rehabilitative procedure. As the design and construction of a metal framework is quite a hard topic to fully understand and master, while a must for being a successful general dentist, the course will mainly emphasize removable partial denture design. The skills and competencies obtained from the previous removable dentures course will help students to understand some of the components of removable partial dentures so that the course will be focused on other components peculiar to removable partial dentures.
REHE 267	Prosthodontic Technology Lab	2 Units	The laboratory phase is the hands-on course where the student will go through the technique of construction of a complete maxillary and mandibular denture.  This will include both a traditional and implant supported overdenture project.
REHE 268	Basic Procedures Competency	2 Units	This course will build on the basic techniques learned in the previous basic procedure courses and aims to prepare the students for their clinical experience.
REHE 269	Basic Procedure Fixed Prosthodontics II Lab	1.5 Unit	Laboratory component of REHE 259-1.
REHE 270	Basic Procedure Fixed Prosthodontics III Lab	1 Unit	Laboratory component of REHE 259.
REHE 272	Basic Procedures in Restorative Dentistry II Lab	1 Unit	Laboratory component of REHE 262.
REHE 274	Endodontics Lab	1 Unit	Laboratory component of REHE 264
REHE 276	Partial Denture Design Lab	2 Units	Laboratory component of REHE 266.
REHE 351	Surgical Periodontics	1 Unit	The course consists of didactic and clinical instruction that provides the student with knowledge of the various types of surgical therapy performed by periodontitis in the management of patients with various periodontal disease conditions. Includes discussion on types of surgery, points of periodontal intervention and when to refer patients to periodontal surgery.
REHE 353	Principles of Treatment Planning II	1 Unit	This course provides lecture presentations to help prepare the student to deal with their patients from the standpoint of patient management and treatment planning. The lectures will guide the students through the thought processes necessary in the development of workable treatment plans. The emphasis will be on exposing the students to principles of treatment planning, integrating evidence based dentistry. The lectures will emphasize the steps and sequencing approach to treatment planning and will include the concept of decisional analysis. This course utilizes knowledge the students have acquired from previous classes.
REHE 355	Esthetic Dentistry	1 Unit	This course provides formal lecture presentations and laboratory exercises to familiarize the students to various esthetic dental materials and techniques to achieve optimal esthetic results.
REHE 358	Dental Materials II	.5 Unit	This is a didactic course that defines and describes properties, composition, indications and contraindications of uses of different dental materials
REHE 360	Implant Dentistry	1 Unit	The course is designed to introduce the third year dental students to the concepts of dental implantology. Students will be introduced to computer guided dental implant treatment planning program Nobel Clinician. This course will provide didactic and laboratory instructions for the students to be able diagnose, treatment plan and restore a patient who needs a single implant.
REHE 362	Clinical Application of CAD/CAM Technologies	.5 Unit	This course covers the criteria, techniques and practice of using CAD/CAM technologies in the clinical environment. In this course, emphasis will be on ceramic restorations made by Cerec (Sirona), as well as an introduction to different options of CAD/CAM machines available in the market. Students will be introduced to an advanced level of expertise in using the latest Cerec software in a variety of clinical applications. There will be also emphasis on the rationale for types of preparations and material selection based on the correct clinical indication.
REHE 400	Regional Board Preparation	.5 Unit	The purpose of this course is to prepare the dental student to challenge a clinical licensing board examination. The students will be examined on the appropriate licensing board materials, and patient clinical activities. Students will be given formative feedback on typodont exercises as needed for their licensing examination.
REHE 413	Advanced Implant Dentistry I	1 Unit	This course is designed to expose the student to advance implant therapies for the dentate and edentulous patient. Through lectures and discussions the students will be demonstrated the multitude of variations of care available for these patients and the restorative processes necessary to delivery that care. Limitations of each of these modalities will be thought. Guidelines of dental implant therapy allowing them to provide most appropriate treatments will be given.
REHE 414	Advanced Implant Dentistry II	1 Unit	This course is designed to expose students to advanced implant treatment options that are available for the partially and fully edentulous patients. Through lecture, discussions and treatment planning sessions students will be exposed to the multitude of treatment options available for the patients and the restorative processes necessary to successful treatment completion. They also will understand the limitations of each of these modalities within the scope of dental implant therapy allowing them to provide the most appropriate treatment direction for their patients.
REHE 453	Principles of Treatment Planning III	1 Unit	Treatment Planning III is designed to permit participation by the student-doctor in the steps in developing a treatment plan. The initial sessions will review data gathering, data interpretation, creating diagnoses and developing both a definitive and alternate treatment plans. Students will be provided with case studies which will be the basis for discussion. Utilizing the preceptor groups, we will stress the analysis of data and the use of the results to develop both diagnoses and treatment plans.
REHE 455	General Anesthesia, Oral Surgery	.5 Unit	The didactic curriculum provides a general background in the pharmacologic, physiologic and clinical aspects of moderate and deep conscious sedation and general anesthesia as may be applicable for oral and general surgery.
REHE 482	Orthodontics	1 Unit	Senior orthodontics provide instruction enabling the dental student to gain judgment, knowledge and skills to select and treat uncomplicated tooth irregularities in children and adults.  The student is also versed in the technique of intra- professional communication and referral.  In addition, advanced topics in comprehensive orthodontics, e.g. ortho-surgical problems, orthodontic management, and orthopedic treatment, mixed dentition treatment and functional appliance therapy are discussed.
REHE 488	Case Presentations I	1 Unit	First Semester of Case Presentation is dedicated to the review example of comprehensive treatment planning material in preparation for the written Western Regional Board, Northeast Regional Board Dental Simulated Clinical Examination and the Case Based Examination (CBE) and case based questions from the National Boards Part II, by discipline. Selected case studies will be presented by the faculty that demonstrates comprehensive care and evidence based dentistry. These cases will be presented in lecture format utilizing Online questions relating to the case will be asked during each presentation. Clinical techniques germane to the various case reports will be presented as needed.
REHE 489	Case Presentations II	1 Unit	First Semester of Case Presentation is dedicated to the review example of comprehensive treatment planning material in preparation for the written Western Regional Board, Northeast Regional Board Dental Simulated Clinical Examination and the Case Based Examination (CBE) and case based questions from the National Boards Part II, by discipline. Selected case studies will be presented by the faculty that demonstrates comprehensive care and evidence based dentistry. These cases will be presented in lecture format utilizing Online questions relating to the case will be asked during each presentation. Clinical techniques germane to the various case reports will be presented as needed.
RUSN 101	Elementary Russian I	4 Units	An introductory course with emphasis on oral skills. Students learn the Cyrillic alphabet and grammatical case structure while building their basic vocabulary and elementary conversational skills. In addition to scheduled class meetings, students must complete interactive lab assignments done outside of class.
RUSN 102	Elementary Russian II	4 Units	Continuation of RUSN 101 with emphasis on oral skills. Students continue to learn cases, verb conjugations, and other major grammar concepts necessary to effective communication in spoken Russian.  In addition to scheduled class meetings, students must complete interactive lab assignments done outside of class.
RUSN 201	Intermediate Russian I	4 Units	Special attention to Russian grammar, more detailed study of grammatical issues, vocabulary building, and word-formation, reading of intermediate-level spoken and written texts in Russian. Students engage with some historical and contemporary aspects of Russian culture. In addition to scheduled class meetings, students must complete interactive lab assignments done outside of class.
RUSN 202	Intermediate Russian II	4 Units	Continuation of RUSN 201. Students continue to increase their knowledge of grammar and vocabulary. Emphasis on developing oral fluency and using authentic language materials. Students deepen their engagement with Russian culture in the target language. In addition to scheduled class meetings, students must complete interactive lab assignments done outside of class.
RUSN 305	Russian Song	1 Unit	The Russian Song course is dedicated to the exploration and performance of vocal music from Russia and the former USSR. Russia comprises many ethnic groups and has a vast repertoire of folk music, folk instruments, and singing styles.  Students will learn children's songs, art songs, "city" romances, Cossack songs, Georgian polyphony and folk dances. Each song is placed in context, with an eye towards culture, symbolism, history, poetry/lyrics, and customs. Students will look at how classical composers use Russian folk music in their long forms. The study of Chastushki, an ancient Russian village phenomenon which continues to evolve, will lead to creating students' own stylistically appropriate poetry and ostinato. Russian percussion and other instruments will enhance the song and dance, all culminating in a final performance at the end of the semester. Offered as RUSN 305 and MUGN 310.
RUSN 311	Advanced Conversation	3 Units	Students work to improve fluency in spoken Russian. Topics of conversation include aspects of contemporary civilization; current vocabulary is stressed. Recommended preparation: RUSN 202.
RUSN 370	Special Topics in Russian	3 Units	This course is designed to address the students' and faculty interests in specific themes or issues not otherwise covered in the curriculum. Approaches and content will vary. This course may have a focus that crosses generic, artistic, historical, disciplinary and geographical boundaries. The honing of the analytical and interpretive skills as well as development of Russian language skills are also integral objectives of the course. The class is conducted in Russian. All written assignments are in Russian. Recommended preparation: Two years of Russian. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RUSN 375	Russian Literature in Translation	3 Units	Topics vary according to student and faculty interest. May include Russian classical and modern literature, cinema, women writers, individual authors. May count towards Russian minor. No knowledge of Russian required. Offered as RUSN 375 and WLIT 375. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RUSN 386	Russian Culture and Civilization: From Varangians to Revolutionaries (862-1917)	3 Units	This course will explore the history, art, and literature of the Eastern Slavic/Russian people from the ninth century to end of the Russian empire in 1917. Students will trace the formation and transformation of the Slavic/Russian state, from Kievan Rus' to the Tsardom of Muscovy and to the Russian empire. The historical background will be illuminated by the literary and artistic works created by outstanding Russian writers, poets, painters, and composers. At the end of the course, students will gain a solid knowledge of the Russian cultural ground and understand the roots of Russian national and cultural identity. Offered as RUSN 386 and WLIT 386. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
RUSN 399	Independent Study	1 - 3 Units	
UCAP 395	SAGES Capstone Experience	1 - 6 Units	UCAP 395 affords students the opportunity to pursue a capstone experience outside the constraints of SAGES capstone courses offered by individual academic departments. Students must identify a project, a mentor and an oversight committee. If the mentor is not a Case faculty member, then the student must also identify a faculty advisor who does hold such an appointment and who will serve as the instructor of record. A capstone experience can take various forms but must include certain elements: critical thinking, regular oversight by the project advisor(s), periodic written and oral reporting of progress, a final written report which describes the project activity (which may be a performance, experiment, student teaching, live case analysis, creative writing endeavor, etc.), and a final public presentation.  More details about course policies, including procedures for registering, are available via the SAGES office and web site.  UCAP 395 may be taken as a one-semester or a two-semester course for 1-6 credits in any given semester and 3-6 credits total.  Permit from Director of SAGES required. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
MGRD 310	Introduction to Clinical Inquiry (IQ)	3 Units	This course is designed for pre-allied health students to introduce key overarching medical topics, including bioethics, public health and health disparities, as well as to integrate key MCAT topics from other courses into a clinically applicable context.  Further, select human anatomy and physiology topics will be introduced.  An important component of this course is the IQ process, which will reinforce scientific inquiry, self-reflection and constructive criticism.  This course will have limited enrollment and is by permission only. Offered as MGRD 310 and MGRD 410.
MGRD 311	Introduction to Clinical Inquiry (IQ) II	3 Units	This course is the second semester in a 2 semester series designed for pre-professional health students to introduce key overarching medical topics, including bioethics, public health and health disparities, as well as to integrate key MCAT topics from other courses into a clinically applicable context.  Further, select human anatomy and physiology topics will be introduced.  An important component of this course is the IQ process, which will reinforce scientific inquiry, self-reflection and constructive feedback. Offered as MGRD 311 and MGRD 411.
MGRD 330	Introduction to Robotic Process Automation (RPA)	1 Unit	Robotic Process Automation (RPA) is the fastest-growing software segment, growing at 63% in 2018.  Many organizations are exploring or have implemented RPA.  New college graduates will be a key driver in the future of automation.  Students will be provided a comprehensive introduction to RPA centered on these fundamentals: overview of RPA, use of the technology, benefits and risks, and applications, process improvement and application to various work processes/industries. The course also includes guidelines on selecting the appropriate processes, workload and people implications, tools for automation, and strategies for successful implementations. It begins by introducing basic RPA concepts, the course then outlines how to apply these concepts to real working environment. UiPath is the primary software for students to practice and do group projects.  The course is primarily intended for undergraduate students (in at least their junior year) who want to kick-start their career in this high-demand domain, have an interest in learning how to improve and want to use software to accelerate processes.  Basic programming knowledge of any development language (C#, .Net, VB, Java, etc.) is beneficial but not required. Prereq: Undergraduate Junior or Senior standing.
MGRD 399	Independent Research in Biomedical Science	1 - 3 Units	This course is a graded independent research course offered in the School of Medicine at the undergraduate level.  Students may use the School of Medicine EnRICH (Enhancing Research and Industry Career Horizons) program to find external research opportunities, may work in the laboratory of a School of Medicine faculty or may identify an appropriate mentored research opportunity independently.  Students work with research mentor and course director to create their customized learning objectives.  Grades are based on meeting objectives and completing reflections.  In lieu of a final exam, students will give a short presentation on their experience and what they learned.
MGRD 401	PREP-aring for Success in a Biomedical PhD Program	1 Unit	This course is designed to prepare NIH Postbaccalaureate Research Education Program (PREP) Scholars for the rigors of a biomedical PhD program.  This is a two-semester series (with MGRD 402 offered in the spring) that will help PREP Scholars navigate the biomedical PhD program application and admissions process, improve their application credentials, and prepare them for success in top biomedical PhD programs throughout the nation. Students receive scientific research training, instruction and experience in reading the primary literature, develop oral and written communication skills, and participate in professional development activities. Students will  prepare a professional scientific abstract, submit it to a national meeting, prepare a scientific poster presentation on their research and present that research poster at a national meeting. Students will be graded on their quality of their work and the overall level of participation in class.  This course is for the eight students accepted and enrolled in the PREP program as of July of each year
MGRD 402	PREP-aring for Success in a Biomedical PhD Program	1 Unit	This course is designed to prepare NIH Postbaccalaureate Research Education Program (PREP) Scholars for the rigors of a biomedical PhD program.  This is a two-semester series (with MGRD 401 offered in the fall) that will help PREP Scholars navigate the biomedical PhD program application and admissions process, improve their application credentials, and prepare them for success in top biomedical PhD programs throughout the nation. Students continue receiving scientific research training, instruction and experience in reading the primary literature, developing oral and written communication skills, and participating in professional development activities. This semester, students will learn the skills necessary for professional interviews.  They will also be exposed to grant writing including determining the proper available grant funding mechanisms, developing a testable hypothesis, generating compelling aims, and searching of relevant literature. They will prepare professional presentation of a journal article. They will also prepare and orally present their own research at our Annual PREP Research Day. Students will be graded on their quality of their work and the overall level of participation in class.
MGRD 410	Introduction to Clinical Inquiry (IQ)	3 Units	This course is designed for pre-allied health students to introduce key overarching medical topics, including bioethics, public health and health disparities, as well as to integrate key MCAT topics from other courses into a clinically applicable context.  Further, select human anatomy and physiology topics will be introduced.  An important component of this course is the IQ process, which will reinforce scientific inquiry, self-reflection and constructive criticism.  This course will have limited enrollment and is by permission only. Offered as MGRD 310 and MGRD 410.
MGRD 411	Introduction to Clinical Inquiry (IQ) II	3 Units	This course is the second semester in a 2 semester series designed for pre-professional health students to introduce key overarching medical topics, including bioethics, public health and health disparities, as well as to integrate key MCAT topics from other courses into a clinically applicable context.  Further, select human anatomy and physiology topics will be introduced.  An important component of this course is the IQ process, which will reinforce scientific inquiry, self-reflection and constructive feedback. Offered as MGRD 311 and MGRD 411.
MGRD 425	Leadership and Professional Development Skills for Biomedical Sciences	0 Unit	This course is designed to give graduate students in the biomedical and health sciences an opportunity to reflect on their professional skills and develop skills in the area of leadership, teamwork, critical thinking, creativity and problem solving.
MGRD 525	Independent Study for PREP Scholars	1 Unit	Independent Study for PREP Scholars enables the Scholar to undertake study of advanced topics in biomedical research science that are not offered as standing courses at Case Western Reserve University. Generally, the Scholar(s) work closely with their primary research mentor to explore the background research literature and current results of the Scholar's research project.  A guided program of study using research reviews, primary research papers, discussions, critiques, and grant-writing sessions will ultimately result in written research proposal that focuses on specific aims or goals of the project and the research strategy including the background, significance, innovation, and experimental approach.  This is a one-credit graded course that requires approximately 15h of total contact time for the semester and 3-4 hours of outside work each week.  The purpose of this course is to provide knowledge and experience in fellowship grant writing, with a focus on the F31 application. This course is for the students accepted and enrolled in the PREP program.
MGRD 610	Internship in Biomedical Sciences	1 - 9 Units	This course is an ungraded (pass/fail) internship.  Students are expected to identify a potential internship that will enhance their career in a meaningful way.  For example, a student interested in education might choose to work with the Great Lakes Science Center to develop and help deliver content for a medical-themed summer camp.  Students interested in getting a job in industry may find a company in their field and intern with them.  Research experiences within CWRU or affiliated hospitals MAY be appropriate only if the student wouldn't otherwise get those experiences in their program and it would significantly help their career.  Therefore, all internships must be identified and approved by the course director and, if counting as an elective toward their degree, their program director, prior to enrolling.   All students must identify an internship mentor at the location of their internship.  The course director will check in with their mentor regularly to ensure an appropriate experience for student as well as the hosting institution.   Credits depend on the scope of the internship.  For each credit you are enrolled in, you will be expected to work at least 50 hours.  So, in other words, if you register for 9 credits in one semester, you will be expected to work a total of at least 450 hours, or about 11-12 weeks full time.  Thus, the number of credits registered should coincide with the agreed upon scope of the internship. In order to pass this course, students will be expected to keep, and submit weekly, a reflection log.  In addition, students will be expected to present on their experiences, including what they did and what they learned, at an end of the semester, and their internship mentor, program director and other students in this course will be invited to attend this public presentation.  Students who do not meet the criteria for hours worked, miss more than 2 of the weekly reflections or do not do an end of the semester presentation will receive a failing grade.
MGRD 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	Research experience in a selected faculty research laboratory designed for international exchange students doing PhD dissertation research. Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
SASS 284	Oppression and Privilege in a Multicultural Society	3 Units	Privilege flings open the doors of opportunity in a multicultural society. Oppression jams those doors tightly shut. This course provides students with understandings of how oppression and privilege operate in a multicultural society to restrict the life chances of minority and disenfranchised group members. Increasing knowledge about the nature and dynamics of oppression and privilege are fundamental dimensions of the ability to value a diverse world. This undertaking requires self-assessment and reflection on discrimination, oppression, and privilege as components of individual awareness. Such insight will help students to live, work, study, and play well with "others" who are culturally different from themselves with respect to race/ethnicity, religion, class, gender, sexual orientation/gender identity, ability, and age. Beyond increasing respectful social interaction, it is hoped that students will be motivated to work towards dismantling systems that perpetuate de-valuing, exploitation, marginalization, and violence against members of subordinate groups. Major consideration will be given to structures of oppression and privilege related to racism, classism, religious bigotry, sexism, heterosexism/transgenderism, ableism, and ageism. Note: A student cannot receive degree credit for both SASS 284 and SOCI 349.
SASS 315	Adoption Practice and Policy	3 Units	This course covers the concepts, knowledge, skills, and policies associated with contemporary adoption practice.  The practice method reflects a constellation perspective, meaning that adoption is examined from the viewpoints of birth families, adoptees, and adoptive families.  Exemplars and case studies are presented for illustration purposes.  Consideration of constellation members' needs at different life cycle stages are presented.  Ethical issues and dilemmas related to adoption are emphasized throughout the course in each content area.  Course content is covered via lectures and classroom discussions, as well as appropriate guest speakers.  Students are expected to participate fully through field trips and classroom discussions.
SASS 318	Death, Grief, and Loss	3 Units	This course provides students the opportunity to become informed, aware citizens understanding human issues related to end-of-life decision making, dying, and experiencing grief and loss.  Topics focus on death and grief across the lifespan; the role of death in American culture; understanding individual and family challenges with decision making at the end of life; and the experience of grieving across life stages, cultures, gender, and spiritual difference. The course provides exposure to the experience of death as it relates to the self of the student; the terminally ill person, and the bereaved.  Students will gain insight into their own values and beliefs in this area, as well as understanding the needs of terminally ill people, those who need support in their grief and mourning, and persons dealing with challenging life and death decisions regarding self or loved ones.  Creation of a personal learning objective is an additional focus.  Course content is implemented via lectures, class discussion, individual and small group work, audio-visuals, and guest speakers.
SASS 325	The Netherlands Social Justice: Health and Violence	3 Units	Social justice issues including violence prevention and health care services/policies will be explored via agency visits, lectures, and discussion with Dutch experts.  The pervasive use of a harm reduction policy in the Netherlands will be examined.  The course will help students develop the analytical skills necessary for evaluating social policy and practice issues related to a range of health care services as well as social justice issues that pertain to health care, prostitution and substance use.  Students will familiarize themselves with the United States and Dutch social policies and practices related to issues such as: right to die, euthanasia for terminally ill, those in chronic pain or severely ill newborns; access to healthcare and health disparities; addictions; and prostitution.  The manner in which a society treats its citizens least capable of taking care of themselves reveals many of the core values of its cultural system of social justice and approaches to health care. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SASS 350	Seminars in Applied Social Sciences	1 - 3 Units	Survey of special subject areas. Topics vary in response to faculty and student interests. Small group discussion. Prerequisite depends on content.
SASS 355	Drugs and Youth	3 Units	Drug abuse is a more acute problem and more widespread than in any previous era of our country.  Just as technology continues to evolve, drug use follows similar paths of evolution.  Today, there are thousands of new drugs available that are used for medicinal purposes, recreational purposes, and other uses that affect the health of our citizens.  The impact of drug use and/or abuse on the lives of ordinary people with be explored both through academic readings as well as biographies of young people who have dealt with the problem of drug abuse.  Material will be presented from a wide range of disciplines and theoretical perspectives highlighting the bio-psycho-social nature of the problem--both the etiology as well as the effects of addiction.  The impact of both macro (society) and micro (family and friends) on drug use of both licit (alcohol, over the counter drugs, and prescription) and illicit (marijuana, hallucinogens, and cocaine) on various subcultures such as sports/athletics, college students, women, adolescents, etc. will be explored.  Course content will be covered via lectures, classroom discussions as well as appropriate guest speakers.
SASS 365	Victimology	3 Units	This course introduces the study of victimology, which is the study of the causes and consequences of victimization, and how victims and the criminal justice system interact. The focus will be on understanding the extent of crime victimization, theories of victimization, and the criminal justice system as it relates to the study of victimology. We will cover topics such as homicide, intimate partner violence, violence exposure, victims' rights, and sexual violence. This course will help students to understand crime victimization from a variety of perspectives with a particular emphasis on the intersection of social work and criminal justice and the role of social workers in the criminal justice system.
SASS 367	Poverty, Wealth Building, and Social Entrepreneurship	3 Units	With poor communities and individuals across the world aspiring for higher standards of living and quality of life, monolithic development strategies are proving to be insufficient.  Microenterprise and social entrepreneurship are among the latest strategies for poverty alleviation.  New strategies that are grass-roots, multi-dimensional, entrepreneurial, and engage stakeholders as partners are gaining ground.  They seek to fundamentally transform the roles and relationships of the stakeholders in the economy.  While social entrepreneurship is revolutionizing the practice of development work, the micro-enterprise sector plays an important role for some of the poorest sectors of society who gain employment, connection to the market, and opportunities for innovation through it.  In this course, we will examine social entrepreneurship, the change it brought about in how development is viewed, conceived, and implemented.  Some of the examples that will provide core content include economic development strategies that promote asset building among the poor; Mandragon in Spain (and other similar institutions from across the world), Greyston Bakery (and other similar examples from around the United States) and Evergreen Cooperative (and other relevant local examples).
SASS 368	Whatever it Takes: Creating Paths Out of Poverty for Children	3 Units	This course will examine current community based strategies for providing young people living in high poverty, multiple needs, urban areas with the educational, social and economic support they need for a stronger future.  The course will begin with a review of the debated root causes of poverty in the United States and an exploration of the short and long term effects of poverty on children.  Students will understand how poverty differentially affects different populations and geographic areas across the United States and globally.  Special attention will be given to the complexity of urban poverty issues and the corresponding need for holistic Interventions.  The course will further explore the concepts and strategies underlying innovative community-based initiatives being implemented across the country including the theories, programming content, inclusion criteria and outcomes of these efforts.  Students will have to critically think through the cost/benefits of this programming considering economic, political and social justice issues.  Special attention will be given to the Harlem Children Zone's (HCZ) model.  The HCZ has achieved successes in boosting college attendance and closing the racial and socioeconomic achievement gap among youth in a high-poverty target area in New York City.  The HCZ is the model for the Obama Administration's Promise Neighborhoods Initiative to support comprehensive neighborhood development programs for children and youth.  It includes efforts for social, educational and medical support designed sequentially to keep up with youth's developmental needs.  Students will critically analyze this model and its applicability across other geographic areas and populations.  Students will also learn from local best practice Initiatives in education attempting to provide a path out of poverty for Cleveland's children through site visits at local schools.  This will include experiential opportunities for firsthand contact with program staff and youth.
SASS 369	Social Networking and Community Organizing in the 21st Century	3 Units	This course will examine the changing nature of place, given increased mobility and diversity in communities within the United States and the emergence of a truly global economy and communication network due to the revolution in information technology.  Community itself is being redefined as many members of society consider their most important relationships are primarily virtual in nature.  The forms of engaging citizens are also changing as old models of community organizing give way to new approaches that focus on connectivity through social networks.  This course will examine various new approaches to engagement, from political or campaign organizing to social networking around mutual interest to mobilizing people for a cause.  We will examine the Obama presidential campaign as an example of a new mobilization strategy that emphasizes choice, flexibility, value, and the ability to influence through organic informal networks.  The course will also explore case studies, such as network centric organizing as developed by Bill Traynor and Lawrence (MA) Community Works.  Special attention will be given to controversial efforts criticized by the right or the left, such as the ACORN voter registration initiative.  Students will also explore the changing nature of community in Northeast Ohio and how this new approach might lead to social change and economic development for greater Cleveland.
SASS 375A	International Travel & Study Abroad: Health, Human and Social Development in Urban & Rural Ecuador	3 Units	The study abroad program to Quito, Ecuador and surrounding rural areas will acquaint students with the history and culture of Ecuador, its social, political and economic development, and the impact it has on the delivery of social services.  Ecuador's historical and current relationship with the United States will also be explored.  This course is designed for students and professionals who are interested in developing an international perspective for the study of social work and related health services.  It will expose students to helping modalities within a cultural context and provide opportunities for cross cultural comparison.  The course will be taught using both lecture and experiential modalities.  Along with interaction with a variety of social service agencies, students will visit historical sites and attend cultural events.  They will be introduced to the art and culture of the area and explore the region's economic development.  Lectures by guest speakers on topics regarding family systems, culture, and history, social and political issues will provide students with learning opportunities. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SASS 375B	International Travel & Study Abroad: Mental Health Issues & Practice Netherlands	3 Units	This 3-credit course will be at least 42 hours of contact time, and include a trip to the Netherlands over Spring Break.  The course will acquaint the participant (undergraduate and graduate) with the socio-political factors that influence policy development and the delivery of mental health care and services to the citizens of the Netherlands.  The role of the social work profession in mental health care and service delivery will be explored via agency visits, lectures, and discussion with Dutch consumers and experts in the area of mental healthcare.  This course will help students develop the analytical skills necessary for evaluating social policy and practice issues related to mental health.  Students will familiarize themselves with the United States and Dutch social policies and practices related to specific mental health issues such as: treatment of severe mental illness, community mental health systems and community reintegration of the those with mental illness, psychosocial rehabilitation, the treatment of people with dual diagnoses of substance dependence and abuse and mental illness, homelessness and the mentally ill, psychiatric hospitalization, employment, education and issues of quality of life for people living with mental illness.  Prior to the trip, students will attend a pre-trip session, will be expected to become familiar with the literature on concepts in social policy and practices relevant to mental health issues in both countries, and following the trip, meet for a post-trip session. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SASS 375C	International Travel & Study Abroad: Invisible Groups in a New Poland	3 Units	This 3 hour Spring Break for the undergraduate and graduate students introduces students and faculty to Polish culture and Polish social policies and practices concerning those social groups that are disenfranchised, stigmatized, and disempowered, including the poor, the unemployed, the homeless, the elderly, victims of domestic violence, and people affected by substance abuse and mental health problems. In cooperation with the Institute of Sociology at the University of Poznan, students and faculty will examine the issues of multiculturalism, social integration, feminism studies, and determinants of social exclusion in the context of the economic and social forces that are shaping a new Poland.  The trip includes guided tours of neighborhoods and social institutions and daily lectures and workshops with government officials, practicing social workers, and many of Poland's most prominent scholars in residence at the University of Pozman.  The experience will challenge students to recognize how the recent political and economic transformation of the country has affected the entire society and how certain groups have paid a higher price.  Students and faculty will also participate in cultural events to gain a greater understanding of Polish society.  Prior to the trip, students will attend two pre-trip sessions, will  be expected to become familiar with the literature on concepts in social policy and practices relevant to social welfare issues in both countries, and following the trip, meet for a post trip session. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SASS 375D	International Travel & Study Abroad: Child Welfare in Guatemala	3 Units	This program is designed to familiarize participants with child welfare issues, social services, and indigenous community development, particularly women cooperatives.  The plan is for participants to learn Spanish each morning, followed by guided tours of various programs.  The experience challenges participants to compare Guatemala with the United States, and to understand the strengths and weaknesses of social policies and human services in both countries.  This course acquaints participants with the socio-political factors that influence the development of child welfare programs in the nongovernmental sector (private, nonprofit) and governmental sector in Guatemala.  The role of the helping professions in child welfare are explored via agency visits, lectures, and collaboration with Guatemalan professionals.  The program is an intense small group experience in living, learning, traveling, and studying. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SASS 375G	Global Health and Social Development in India	3 Units	The study abroad program explores the innovative approaches to health and social development in India and draws parallel to that of the United States. The purpose of the trip is to familiarize students with Indian social development and social policy issues in regards to multicultural aspects of healthcare, poverty alleviation, non-formal education, and application of information communication technologies in addressing social problems. The trip will include guided tours to neighborhoods, field-action project sites, health, social and educational institutions and government establishments. Daily lectures by practicing social workers, healthcare professionals, policy advocates, field workers, government officials and eminent Indian scholars and researchers will further enhance students' understanding.    This study abroad course will also acquaint students with history and culture of India, its social, political and economic development and the impact it has on the delivery of social services The course will be taught using both lecture and experiential modalities. Along with visiting a variety of governmental and non-governmental institutions, health care facilities, organizations and projects, students will visit historical sites and attend cultural events. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SASS 375H	21st Century Ghana: Culture, Institutions & Development in West Africa	3 Units	This two-week study abroad program to Ghana, West Africa will introduce students to the history and culture of Ghana, its social, political and economic development, and current social issues and institutional responses. Among the specific social issues to be examined in the course are health, education and community development. We will pay particular attention to understanding how the role of culture, faith and religion is shaping institutional, community and individual responses to the challenges and opportunities of globalization and development.  The course will be taught using a combination of lectures, individual and group exercises and experiential learning, including a community service project, a brief home-stay for each student with a Ghanaian family and a day of work shadowing with a Ghanaian professional. Along with lectures from local academics and interaction with a variety of institutions and agencies, students will visit historical sites and attend cultural events. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SASS 375I	Global Issues, Health, & Sustainability in India	3 Units	Global Issues, Health, & Sustainability in India is an interdisciplinary social work and engineering collaboration that includes a short-term cross-cultural immersion.  This course brings together social work (knowledge, values, and skills) and health care (promotion, education, and community) perspectives to the understanding of technical project assessment, selection, planning and implementation in India.  The course is also designed to help students understand culturally relevant community engagement strategies to ensure project acceptance in underserved and developing communities. Many field sites will be visited in order to observe first-hand the community assessment and development of projects that engineers implement. An example of these projects could include infrastructure to support green energy and water (resource planning, development, conservation, and sanitation).   This study abroad course will acquaint students with history and culture of India, its social, political and economic development and the impact it has on health and the delivery of social services. Participants will learn about factors affecting the abilities to reach, treat, educate, and equip communities to improve health outcomes. Engineering students will learn the quantitative aspects using a paradigm of hierarchical systems, mathematical modeling, and scenario analysis using a 'reasoning support' system.  Together the engineering, social work, and health sciences students in disciplinary-balanced teams  will jointly work on real and meaningful projects marrying the descriptive scenarios (that is the 'subjective' aspect) with the numerical scenario analysis based on mathematical modeling (or 'objective' aspect) to form a coherent view of the future. The course will be taught using both lecture and experiential modalities. Engineering students will conduct computer modeling work. Along with visiting a variety of governmental and non-governmental institutions, organizations and projects, students will visit historical sites and attend cultural events. Offered as ECSE 342I and SASS 375I. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SASS 375L	South Africa / Social Justice/S.W., International Learning through Community Immersion & Internship	3 Units	This three-credit course will be conducted in partnership with Educo Africa in Cape Town, South Africa. The course will provide experiential and service learning social work experiences in a nation still experiencing the lingering effects of decades of apartheid rule as well as the co-existence of developed and developing worlds within the boundaries of the country. Course activities will encourage cross cultural learning experiences to increase knowledge pertinent to South Africa's social, cultural, environmental, political and historical reality. It will expose students to community development challenges as well as environmental and social justice issues in a South African context.  The goal of the course is to increase personal, community and global leadership potential of social work and social development professionals. This course in partnership to Educo Africa will use a community-based context to increase the effectiveness and expertise of students and will support student's engagement in program development and building international networks and partnerships. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SASS 385	Social Welfare Capstone Seminar	3 Units	This seminar course will revolve around the identification and critical investigation of current social problems.  Insights gained from social welfare research will be applied to better understand these problems.  Successful completion of the course will require critical analysis of published research, integration of information from social work and different disciplines, an oral presentation and a final written research report including a literature review. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
SASS 390	Independent Study for Undergraduates	1 - 3 Units	Individual study in Applied Social Sciences involving specific programs of reading, research, and special projects. Requires prior approval of faculty member directing the project. Recommended preparation: 12 hours of social science courses; approval of MSASS Associate Dean.
SASS 405	Nonprofit Ethics and Professionalism	3 Units	This course is an application of ethical frameworks and analysis to nonprofit organizations.  Using cases and essays, the course will help nonprofit managers become better equipped to address ethical problems and dilemmas in their work in the following areas:  ethics of boards, ethics and leadership, ethics and organizational culture, professional ethics, and ethics and fundraising.
SASS 407	Nonprofit Revenue Planning and Development	3 Units	Revenue strategy and development are critical in advancing the mission and core work of a nonprofit organization, and are among the most strategic responsibilities held by an executive director and his/her board. Nonprofits face a myriad of revenue options which could be pursued but each of these has implications for how the organization advances it mission and its sustainability. The course will examine how to assess these revenue sources and evaluate how they can contribute to an organization's overall financial vitality.
SASS 408	Nonprofit Philanthropic Fundraising	3 Units	This course will provide current and future nonprofit leaders with a detailed survey of the practices, principles, and process of fundraising, enabling them to effectively create, participate in, and manage fund development programs and staff.  Successful fundraising is shown to be communication-based and built upon solid relationships with defined constituencies of donors and potential donors.
SASS 409	Nonprofit Strategic Planning	3 Units	This is an integrated practicum designed to provide "hands-on" experience in planning for, designing, and conducting strategic planning in nonprofit organizations.  Students will learn to assess organizational readiness, facilitate the design of strategic planning processes, create a variety of approaches involving key stakeholders, and finalize a planning design suited to organizational culture.
SASS 410	Nonprofit Databased Decision-Making	3 Units	Nonprofit leaders face a wide range of data needs and opportunities to use data to inform strategy and practice. This course is designed to give students a working knowledge of data analysis, statistical concepts, research designs for program planning and evaluation, and techniques for problem solving. By exploring a continuum of decision making opportunities in the nonprofit sector, the course will present methods and frameworks for collecting and interpreting data to inform organizational action.
SASS 411	Nonprofit Leadership Dialogs	3 Units	This course is intended to enable students to learn about major nonprofit leadership issues and trends through interaction and dialog with successful nonprofit leaders.  It is also designed to provide outside nonprofit leaders with the opportunity to learn about the quality of the Mandel Center's student body.
SASS 420	Nonprofit Organization and Management	3 Units	This course will focus on theories of organizations and general concepts and principles of management, governance, and leadership. Organizational design, behavior, performance, and effectiveness will be studied, and the special character and management problems of nonprofit organizations will be highlighted and analyzed.
SASS 425	Nonprofit Financial Management	3 Units	This course focuses on techniques and principles of financial management including budgeting, finance and investment decision making. Topics include budget formulation, analysis and planning, present value analysis, cost-effectiveness, cash flow analysis, portfolio management, and venture planning. Special emphasis will be given to the unique problems of nonprofits in capital formation, generating earned income, managing endowments, gifts and grants, and tax planning.
SASS 426	Research Methods in Social Work	3 Units	This course provides an overview of the basic concepts used in the conduct of scientific inquiry and the tools of research methodology. It introduces students to the issues involved in the design, implementation, analysis and utilization of social research. Students are encouraged to focus on a practice-related research problem in their individual or group research projects, as well as to focus on research issues relevant to their specialization, field of practice, or field of practicum setting. Students are alerted to the risks of cultural bias in research throughout the course through examples and scientific readings.
SASS 427	International Non-Governmental Organizations	3 Units	This course examines the role of voluntary associations in the international arena and, in particular, the multiple roles of international non-governmental organizations in affecting international political and economic outcomes. The course also examines the theoretical issues surrounding NGOs and international relations, particularly the relationship between global civil society and international political outcomes.
SASS 428	Nonprofit Board Governance	3 Units	This elective course deals with the definition, history and concept of trusteeship, the areas of responsibilities of Boards of Trustees, the authority of Boards and the limits on its exercise, the organization of Boards and their committees, and the Board's relationships with the Executive Director, the staff and the organization's constituencies.
SASS 430	Nonprofit Human Resources and Volunteer Management	3 Units	Theories and principles of managing people in organizations are addressed in this course, including motivation theory and human resource development strategies. Particular attention is devoted to issues critical to nonprofit organizations, such as the management of volunteers, management of professionals, working with trustees, and staff/board relationships.
SASS 432	Nonprofit Marketing	3 Units	This course provides students with a comprehensive overview of the principles and techniques of nonprofit marketing and with an understanding of the multiple contexts in which they are applicable--marketing of products and services, marketing to potential funders, marketing of ideas and behaviors (social marketing and advocacy). The focus of the course is on managerial decision-making to achieve organizational objectives and enhance organizational viability.
SASS 450	Nonprofit Law	3 Units	This course provides the student with a basic grounding in the laws and regulations governing nonprofit organizations. Content will include the procedures for incorporating, reporting, and maintaining tax-exempt status as a nonprofit organization, a familiarity with legal principles and research methods, and an overview of the legal, regulatory, and policy issues facing contemporary nonprofit organizations.
SASS 455	Field Education Seminar: Organizational Theory & Practice Seminar	1 Unit	This course is designed to be taken by social work students in the second semester of their master's program. Traditional students enrolled in SASS 455 take SASS 651 Field Education concurrently.  The Field Education Seminar provides the support and guidance necessary to assist social work students to begin to integrate professional experiences as a developing generalist practitioner. The purpose of field education is to develop a social work practitioner who is: 1	Grounded in the values and knowledge base of the social work profession 2	Able to use the full spectrum of the values and knowledge base to guide interventions with clients and client systems 3	Able to evaluate the outcomes of interventions to improve the quality of service delivery 4	Aware of the importance and value of professional use of self This requires the ability to integrate the knowledge and skills acquired in the classroom setting with the opportunity to apply and strengthen them in the field practicum. The overall goal of this course is to provide social work students with a solid grounding in learning through field education as well as opportunities to integrate classroom and field learning at the generalist practice level. Coreq: SASS 651.
SASS 456	Field Education: Organizational Theory and Practice Seminar II	1 Unit	This course is the second of two Field Seminar courses taken by Non-Advanced Standing students. This course runs concurrently with Field Practice Course SASS 652B. In this Field Seminar Course, students will continue to learn about organizational theory and practice in the context of their field sites. You will continue to work on the organizational assessment that you began in 455 by doing an external organizational assessment. You will also learn about organizational intervention and evaluation and develop a potential organizational intervention for your placement organization. This course contains one live session, and students are expected to complete all asynchronous coursework and readings up to and including those for the live session week and to come prepared to discuss the material and ask questions. Field Seminar Courses receive a letter grade. Prereq: SASS 455. Coreq: SASS 652B.
SASS 457	Advanced Field Education: Organizational Theory and Practice Seminar	1 Unit	This course is designed to be taken by Advanced Standing students in the first semester of Field Education. Students enrolled in this course take SASS 653A concurrently. The course provides the support and guidance necessary to assist students in integrating professional experiences as developing social work practitioners. Students will be introduced to organizational theory and practice in the context of their field sites, conduct an organizational assessment, and propose an organizational intervention. Students will also explore their role as a social work intern and develop an understanding of the learning processes associated with field education. Prereq: Advanced Standing and enrolled in the online MSW program.
SASS 465	Field Education: Organizational Theory and Practice Seminar	1 Unit	The course provides the support and guidance necessary to assist students to begin to integrate professional experiences as developing social work practitioners and to learn how the human service organization influences the delivery of social work services.  Students will be introduced to organizational theory and practice through development of an understanding of their field site.   Students will also be introduced to their role as a social work intern, the effective use of supervision, and mechanisms to identify and evaluate their learning goals throughout the course. This course is for Intensive Weekend Students only. Prereq: Enrolled in MSW Intensive Weekend program.
SASS 466	Field Education: Organizational Theory and Practice Seminar II	1 Unit	The course builds on the first seminar and provides additional support and guidance necessary for students to integrate professional experiences as developing generalist social work practitioners. Students will develop a more advanced understanding of the learning agreement, the realities of ethical dilemmas and decision making, self-care and self-advocacy, and prepare for furthering their learning in a specialized field placement.  It also continues the focus on how the human service organization influences the delivery of social work services.  Students will continue to learn about social work practice with organizations through continued learning about their field site, and will design a brief intervention to be used at the site. This course is for Intensive Weekend Students only. Prereq: SASS 465.
SASS 467	Advanced Field Education: Organizational Theory and Practice Seminar	1 Unit	The course provides the support and guidance necessary to assist students to begin to integrate professional experiences as developing social work practitioners and to learn how the human service organization influences the delivery of social work services.  Students will be introduced to organizational theory and practice through development of an understanding of their field site.   Students will also be introduced to their role as a social work intern, the effective use of supervision, and mechanisms to identify and evaluate their learning goals throughout the course. This course is for Intensive Weekend Students only. Prereq: Enrolled in MSW Intensive Weekend program.
SASS 470	Social Policy	3 Units	This course provides basic perspectives on social policies related to poverty, health, aging, mental health, substance abuse, and discrimination. An analytical framework is used to systematically identify, define, and analyze social problems and policies. The course also introduces the student to social planning and service delivery.
SASS 471	Introduction to Data Science for Social Impact	3 Units	Students will be introduced to the current uses of data science in social work and social policy through the analysis of case studies in the areas of child welfare, homelessness, and criminal justice. Through these case studies, students will develop a clear understanding of data science tools for data discovery, prediction, and causal inference, as well as the ethical framework in which projects are developed and applied. The class will cover social stewardship in data science for social impact, including confidentiality, ethics, unequal impact, bias awareness and algorithmic fairness. This is a required class for students pursuing a Certificate in Data Science for Social Impact (DSSI). As such, this class will motivate students to identify areas of interest and sources of data for a research project to be developed in their second year, once they have acquired a more in-depth knowledge of data science techniques.
SASS 472	Semester Research Project in Data Science for Social Impact	3 Units	Students will perform a semester-long reproducible research data science project on a topic relevant to social impact. Students will present advances of their project as they go through the traditional steps of implementing a data science project within an ethical framework outlined in the appendix. Lectures will address social stewardship in data science for social impact, including confidentiality, ethics, unequal impact, bias awareness and algorithmic fairness. Students will apply these concepts at each step of their research project. They will share progress of their research project at intermediate stages of the process and engage in constructive peer feedback in the classroom. Lectures will review the basic elements of data science and analytics using R Project open source software. R is an open-source software project with broad abilities to access machine-readable open- data resources, data cleaning and assembly functions, and a rich selection of statistical packages, used for data analytics, model development, prediction, inference and visualization. This is a second year class for students pursuing a Certificate in Data Science for Social Impact (DSSI). As such, this class will ground the knowledge and practice acquired through the certificate program on a specific data science project for social impact. Prereq: SASS 471 and DSCI 451.
SASS 495	Field Education: Organizational Theory and Practice Seminar	1 Unit	This course is designed to be taken by social work students in the first semester of their master's program.  Students enrolled in SASS 495 take SASS 601 Field Education I concurrently.   The course provides the support and guidance necessary to assist students to begin to integrate professional experiences as developing social work practitioners and to learn how the human service organization influences the delivery of social work services.  Students will be introduced to organizational theory and practice through development of an understanding of their field site.   Students will also be introduced to their role as a social work intern, the effective use of supervision, and mechanisms to identify and evaluate their learning goals throughout the course.
SASS 496	Field Education: Organizational Theory an	Practice Seminar II	1 Unit	This one credit course is designed to be taken by social work students during the second half of their generalist field education experience. Students enrolled in SASS 496 take SASS 602 on campus concurrently.   The course builds on the first seminar and provides additional support and guidance necessary for students to integrate professional experiences as developing generalist social work practitioners. Students will develop a more advanced understanding of the learning agreement, the realities of ethical dilemmas and decision making, self-care and self-advocacy, and prepare for furthering their learning in a specialized field placement.  It also continues the focus on how the human service organization influences the delivery of social work services.  Students will continue to learn about social work practice with organizations through continued learning about their field site, and will design a brief intervention to be used at the site. Prereq: SASS 495 and SASS 601. Coreq: SASS 602.
SASS 497A	Advanced Field Education: Organizational Theory and Practice Seminar	1 Unit	This course is designed to be taken by advanced standing social work students in the first semester of their master's program.  Students enrolled in SASS 497A take SASS 603A Field Education concurrently.   The course provides the support and guidance necessary to assist students to begin to integrate professional experiences as developing social work practitioners and to learn how the human service organization influences the delivery of social work services.  Students will be introduced to organizational theory and practice through development of an understanding of their field site.   Students will also be introduced to their role as a social work intern, the effective use of supervision, and mechanisms to identify and evaluate their learning goals throughout the course. Coreq: SASS 603A.
SASS 500	Special Topics in Applied Social Sciences	1 - 6 Units	
SASS 501	Nonprofit Practicum	0 - 6 Units	The overall goal of this course is to provide MNO students the opportunity to develop a practicum experience in a non-profit organizational setting.  The course is designed to enhance knowledge acquired in the classroom by allowing students the flexibility to develop an individualized plan that will integrate professional practice skill development.  The students will work closely with their Academic Advisor to determine whether a practicum meets the student's learning needs.  The student will also be assigned a Practicum Instructor, who is based at the non-profit setting and provides the direct instruction of the student.  Finally, the student will work with the Faculty Advisor, who is based at the School and serves as a link between all parties, oversees the requirements and standards of the School, and participates and consults in the design of the student's learning experience.  The Student, Practicum Instructor, and Faculty Advisor all participate in various ways in the evaluation of student's practicum; the Faculty Advisor is responsible for assigning the grade.
SASS 502	Change Agent Intensive	1 Unit	The Change Agent Intensive (CHAI) provides an introduction to the practice and profession of social work.  It is an initial, immersive experience for students to engage with faculty and their peers to examine the social issues and social problems central to social work. CHAI introduces the values and ethics that guide the social work profession, and the dilemmas that social work professionals face. This course centers the learning experience within the context of greater Cleveland so that students will begin to value the importance of community as a means of understanding social work practice at all levels - individual, family, group, organization, and community.   CHAI will present students with opportunities to reflect upon the role of privilege, oppression and discrimination in their own lives and the lives of others.  The course encourages the development of reflective self-awareness and critical thinking. Students will be challenged to understand and value the worldviews of persons different from themselves and develop the ability to take different perspectives in their work.
SASS 503	Foundations of Social Policy and Service Delivery	2 Units	The course focuses on ethical dilemmas inherent in social policy issues, the political and organizational processes used to influence policy, the process of policy formulation, advocacy, and the use of ethical reasoning in frameworks for examining social policies in light of principles of social, economic, and environmental justice. It examines the philosophical, historical, and socioeconomic foundations of social welfare and the evolution of social policy and the social work profession in the United States. Students are taught to consider current social policy within the context of historical and contemporary factors that shape policy.
SASS 504	Theories of Human Development and Human Diversity	2 Units	This generalist course examines theories and research on human development and human diversity. The course explores theories and research on biological, social, cultural, and spiritual development over the lifespan, as well as how oppression and privilege manifest at the individual, institutional. and social/cultural levels and how oppression impacts the life opportunities of members of minority and disenfranchised groups. The course stresses interactions between an individual and their environment.
SASS 505	Adoption: Practice and Policy	3 Units	This course covers the concepts, knowledge, skills, and policies associated with contemporary adoption practice. The practice method reflects a triad perspective, meaning that adoption is examined from the viewpoints of birth parents, adoptees, and adoptive parents. For each topic area, social work roles, activities, tasks, and skills are explored along with policy issues. Exemplars and case studies are presented for illustration purposes. Consideration of triad needs at different life cycle stages are presented. The issues of ethnically competent adoption practice are emphasized throughout the course in each content area.
SASS 506	Perspectives on Management and Leadership	0 Unit	This course is designed to explore management and leadership capabilities. The class explores personal and organizational aspects of leadership and management examining theoretical perspectives and models, governance, communication, advocacy, ethics and accountability. In addition, the course examines key tools for effective management and leadership to manage risk, challenges, building consensus and collaboration. The course also guides students through a personal leadership development journey. The classroom will serve as an interactive learning environment. Students will learn management and leadership abilities from readings, lecture, group discussion, reflection, assessment, planning and application. The content of the course integrates research across social work, business, the nonprofit sector, and literature to inform a solid perspective to enhance management and leadership capabilities. This course includes activities and feedback for students to facilitate growth and development, and is appropriate for students who want to become effective managers and leaders, growing related abilities and knowledge.
SASS 507	Community Theory and Practice	2 Units	This theory and practice course introduces community (or macro) practice social work. This course advances multiple theories (critical social theory, community capitals theory, conflict theory) and methods of community practice for social workers as agents of social change. Students learn to design and implement a participatory assessment process at a community level and provides foundational theories and assessment methods.  Students learn to conduct quantitative research for assessing community needs and assets. Course work focuses on the development and application of practice skills in work with communities and organizations, particularly models and skills in community building. Focusing on real world situations, the course includes both didactic and experiential teaching and learning. The course integrates and applies foundation learning in the areas of social policy, diversity, discrimination with theories of power and empowerment, human capabilities and asset based community development.
SASS 508	Individual and Family Theory and Practice	4 Units	This course focuses on integrating and applying theory and social work practice with both individuals and families. The overarching goal of Individual and Family Theory and Practice (IFTP) is to develop culturally competent social work generalist practitioners who use and anti-oppressive/anti-racist lenses and possess the knowledge and skills necessary to practice ethically with individuals and families in diverse social work practice settings. This course is structured to include pre-recorded lectures to be viewed before class, with discussion and experiential laboratory learning during class sessions. In addition to watching the pre-recorded lectures, there is considerable preparation time required before each class session.  The lab portions of the course provide the opportunity for students to practice skills used with individuals and families and receive constructive feedback from the instructor and peers.  Major social work theories/approaches to practice, such as ecological systems and family systems theories, empowerment, strengths-based approaches, life course theories, evidence-informed practice will be introduced and applied to frame students, learning social work practice with individuals and families.  Students will also be introduced to systems-based, trauma-informed, solution-focused, task-centered, and relationship-based intervention approaches and other change-oriented strategies utilized in social work practice with individuals and families and have opportunities to apply some of these approaches.
SASS 509	Group Theory and Practice	2 Units	This course focuses on theory and practice with groups, with a particular emphasis on task groups, psychoeducational groups, skill development and remediation groups, and growth groups. The overarching goal of group theory practice is to develop culturally competent social work generalist practitioners who are armed with the knowledge and skills necessary to practice ethically with groups in diverse social work practice settings. This course is structured to include pre-recorded lecture to be viewed before class, and discussion and experiential laboratory learning in a 1.5 hour face-to-face session. In addition to watching the pre-recorded lectures, there is also considerable preparation time required before each class session.  The lab portion will consist of student participation in a live support group regarding their experiences in the social work program and provides the opportunity for students to practice skills and receive constructive feedback from the instructor and peers.
SASS 510	Health Disparities	3 Units	This course aims to provide theoretical and application tools for students from many disciplinary backgrounds to conduct research and develop interventions to reduce health disparities. The course will be situated contextually within the historical record of the United States, reviewing social, political, economic, cultural, legal, and ethical theories related to disparities in general, with a central focus on health disparities. Several frameworks regarding health disparities will be used for investigating and discussing the empirical evidence on disparities among other subgroups (e.g., the poor, women, uninsured, disabled, and non-English speaking populations) will also be included and discussed. Students will be expected to develop a research proposal (observational, clinical, and/or intervention) rooted in their disciplinary background that will incorporate materials from the various perspectives presented throughout the course, with the objective of developing and reinforcing a more comprehensive approach to current practices within their fields.  Offered as CRSP 510, PQHS 510, MPHP 510, NURS 510, and SASS 510.
SASS 511	Issues in Health Policy and Service Delivery	3 Units	This course examines health care policy issues and options, and highlights the development of health care policy in the U.S., the influence of health policy development, and the role of social work.  It also examines the problems, policy, and program issues in the subsidy, financing, reorganization, and regulatory capacity of health policy.  National, state, and local issues will be stressed. The course is for students in the health concentration but also welcomes students from other areas. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 470 or SASS 503.
SASS 512	Legislative and Political Process	3 Units	This course focuses on how to deal effectively with legislators, their staff, and legislative systems.  The roles of money and information in legislative and political systems are examined.  The process through which a bill moves to become law is explored, including critical points of intervention in that process. Lobbying legislators, including presentation of testimony and use of coalitions, is featured. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 470 or SASS 503 or enrolled in the MNO program.
SASS 513	Aging Policy and Service Delivery	3 Units	This course reviews current income, health, and social service policies for older Americans. It also investigates patterns and levels of care for this population. Trends and issues in policies and programs for older adults are analyzed in the context of the dimensions and differential characteristics of the aging population in this country. Some cross-national comparisons of services for older persons are included in this analysis. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 470 or SASS 503.
SASS 514	Mental Health Policy and Service Delivery	3 Units	This course is designed for students preparing for careers as social workers in the mental health field with an understanding of mental health policy and service delivery at the federal, state, and local levels.  Through readings, lectures, discussion, and written assignments, the course will aid students in developing a macro-level perspective of mental health policies and programs. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 470 or SASS 503.
SASS 516	Alcohol and Other Drug Abuse Policy and Service Delivery	3 Units	This course explores selected current alcohol and other drug abuse (AODA) problems using a problem analysis framework. Emphasis is placed on current and past AODA problem definitions as they affect policy and program development.  Conceptualization of the problems resulting from AODA patterns of use and abuse, causation theories, the impact of cultural and social diversity as well as discrimination upon all client systems, and the role of local and national institutions which advocate for this population group are reviewed. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 470 or SASS 503.
SASS 517	Family System Interventions	3 Units	This course covers the knowledge, concepts, and skills associated with working families. The practice method will reflect a family systems approach, integrating theories and approaches within a systemic perspective. It will build practice skills in assessing, interviewing, and intervening with families and emphasize a strength-based perspective on intervention with families. Considerations of family issues at different developmental stages will be presented.  The issue of ethically competent and community-based social work practice with families will be stressed throughout the course for each content area. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 477 or (SASS 504 and SASS 508).
SASS 518	Social Work with Death, Grief and Loss	3 Units	This course focuses on the concept of death and related topics from a social work perspective.  Such topics include the role of death in American culture; the dying process and its institutions; assessment and intervention strategies; life span and family life considerations; and end-of-life decisions.  The course provides both theoretical and experiential exposure to the dying process as it relates to self, the dying person, and the bereaved.  Students will gain insight into serving the terminally ill, those who need assistance with mourning and grief, and clients dealing with difficult life-and-death decisions regarding loved ones. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 477 or (SASS 504 and SASS 508 and SASS 509).
SASS 519	Children and Families in the School Setting	3 Units	This course prepares students to be certified school social workers.  The course addresses major issues in American schools; a theoretical framework for school social work services; design, deliverance, and evaluation of school social work services; legal and ethical issues; and the roles and intervention strategies of school social workers. It covers student and family problems and areas of need such as disability, truancy, divorce, teen pregnancy, youth depression and suicide, substance abuse, violence, and dropping out of school. This course is required for those participating in a planned program of study leading to state certification as a school social worker.  If space permits, other students may enroll if they have or have had school social work experience. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 477 or (SASS 504 and SASS 508 and SASS 509).
SASS 520	Homelessness Policy and Service Delivery	3 Units	This course provides an understanding of homelessness and its incidence and prevalence, its origins, both historical and social, its consequences, and policy-based strategies for its prevention. The course investigates the impact of homelessness on single individuals, families with children, minorities, and vulnerable populations such as the mentally ill and alcoholics. Students, organized into a task force, examine a range of professional and community-based responses to the problem.  The task force method enables students to assess the effects of public policy on homeless people, critique the effectiveness and adequacy of local shelter and service programs, and propose community-based strategies to prevent, stop, and better homelessness. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 470 or SASS 503.
SASS 521	Supervision	3 Units	The course focuses on the role of strength-based supervision in improving outcomes clients served in the various social service and nonprofit systems, and on developing the skills necessary for effective supervision and leadership.  The course examines the context of contemporary supervision, and presents models of supervision grounded in systems theory, developmental theory, and social justice theory.  This course is also designed to build practical skills for organizational leadership, focusing on adaptive leadership.
SASS 522	Motivational Interviewing	3 Units	This advanced methods course provides a basic orientation to the concepts in Motivational Interviewing, which is a collaborative, person-centered form of eliciting and strengthening motivation for change.  It is a way of working with persons to assist them in accessing their intrinsic motivation to change behaviors that contradict their essential values and interfere with the achievement of their life goals.  Motivational Interviewing is both a philosophy and a set of strategic techniques.  It is an evidence-based treatment with a broad range of applications. The course will place an emphasis on individuals with severe and persistent mental illness and/or substance use disorders.  Specific techniques to recognize, elicit and strengthen change talk, as well as responding to resistance and consolidating a person's commitment to change will be explored.  Exercises and examples specific to the unique practice setting of participants will be incorporated.  Students will have an opportunity to practice these techniques in role/real-play and other group exercises as well as measure skill application and provide meaningful feedback to their peers. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 477 or (SASS 504 and SASS 508).
SASS 523	Introduction to Neuroscience in Social Work Practice	1 Unit	This course is a one-credit course and provides an introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience principles useful in social work practice. The goal of the course is to explain the biological basis of human behavior in the social environment. Students will learn to recognize mechanisms of perception and cognitive processes and will learn to identify pathways of signal processing, from the body of a single neuron to specialized neuronal structures of the brain. Class discussion will focus on how events of the physical world may affect an individual's behavior, as an individual and as a member of the community. Information gained in this course will help students to understand the complexity of the human adult nervous system in health and disability including trauma and addiction as well as the role of neural processing in cognitive interventions.
SASS 524	Social Work with Military Veterans and their Families	3 Units	Military Social Work is an advanced direct practice concentration course designed to educate social workers in the needs of military service members on active duty and during transition to civilian life. SASS 477, SASS 547 and SASS 549 are pre-requisites for this course. The course is based on the guidelines released in 2010 by the Council on Social Work Education (CSWE) and on the NASW educational program for social workers developed as part of the Joining Forces initiative. The course takes the perspective that uniformed forces have a specific culture, rules of conduct, and identifiable bio-psycho-social concerns related to military service. This specificity requires social worker to learn about evidence-based military practice behaviors and core competencies working with members of any branch of the Department of Defense (DoD) and Veterans Affairs (VA).  This course will help students to understand military culture, to recognize stressors related to military service and to address mental health problems affecting military personnel and their families. The course will use case materials to illustrate similarities and differences among various populations including minority/ethnic identity groups.  Students will have opportunities to work on the following abilities:   The Revised MSASS Abilities:  1.    Identify as a Reflective Professional Social Worker 2.    Advocate for Social, Economic and Environmental Justice 3.    Apply Social Work Methods 4.    Uphold Social Work Values and Ethics 5.    Integrate Cultural, Economic, and Global Diversity  6.    Think Critically about Theory and Research Knowledge 7.    Communicate Effectively 8.    Develop as a Social Work Leader Prereq: SASS 547 and SASS 549.
SASS 528	Evidence Informed Practice	2 Units	This course is an introduction to the research methods and tools used in social work. Premised on CSWE competencies #4 and 9 this course provides the foundational skills needed to evaluate evidence-based/evidence-informed practice interventions. It includes qualitative and quantitative research content that provides understanding of scientific, analytic, and ethical approaches to building knowledge for practice. Social workers employ research in the provision of high-quality services; to initiate change; to improve practice, policy and social service delivery; and to evaluate their own practice.
SASS 529	Child and Family Policy and Service Delivery	3 Units	This course focuses on major federal legislation impacting children, youth, and families, examined in the context of community based social work policy/practice. It builds upon the foundation course in social welfare policy and enables students to use an advocacy approach to provide policy-informed services and to participate in policy and implementation and change. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 470 or SASS 503.
SASS 531	Collaboration & Strategic Partnerships	3 Units	The development of strategic alliances is being used increasingly as a key for nonprofit organizations to carry out their missions.  This course is designed to provide students with the conceptual and practical resources necessary for leadership in the formation and maintenance of such alliances.  Various models and strategies for creating and sustaining local, community-based, and national relationships are explored.  The course is based on "practical theory," builds on current knowledge about creating mulch-organizational partnerships, and expands capabilities to participate in these efforts.  The overarching goals of this course are that students, as members of this "learning community," will (a) develop a deeper understanding of the core knowledge required for successful collaboration, (b) deepen their appreciation of the values and ethics involved in creating strategic alliances, and (c) enhance their ability to apply acquired skills in the area of inter-organizational relations. Prereq: Advanced Standing or (SASS 504 and SASS 507 and SASS 508 and SASS 509) or enrolled in the MNO Program.
SASS 532	Needs Assessment and Program Evaluation	3 Units	This course covers research methods and analytic tools that are used in communities and organizations to plan, monitor and evaluate programs, projects and initiatives.  It builds upon the research methods course in the foundation curriculum and deepens and expands this content at the advanced level.  The content prepares students to use quantitative and qualitative research methods to plan and evaluate programs, policies and practices.   The class covers the conceptual and technical aspects of conducting needs assessment in and applying the tools and findings to the community, program and organizational development process.  The course employs a circle perspective with the goal that students will be able to judge the strengths and weaknesses of various tools and approaches and the degree to which ethical standards have been met.  Students are introduced to a variety of methods for community and needs assessment, demographic, statistical and geographic analysis, qualitative and quantitative data gathering methods, and program and policy evaluation designs.  The importance of conducting research in ways that respect cultural diversity and are valid across diverse populations is emphasized.  The practical aspects of using data to drive decision making, quality improvement, outcomes management and the engagement of partners and stakeholders are also covered in the course.  This course is structured to have a strong emphasis on skill development in data gathering, analysis and application. Prereq: SASS 426 or Advanced Standing.
SASS 533	Violence: Social Work and Public Health Perspectives	3 Units	This course focuses on violence as a public health issue that is important for social workers to address and understand.  Violence is a complex social problem that requires a multi-disciplinary approach to prevention and intervention.  This class will address violence at multiple levels (individual, family, community) and as it occurs across multiple systems (e.g., mental health, substance use, criminal justice, and education).  A public health model examines a particular behavior with respect to prevention and intervention at multiple levels. A public health approach requires an understanding of etiology, developmental course, and outcomes related to risk and protective factors.  This course will utilize up to date research on various forms of violent behavior and comorbidities as they occur at the individual, family, and community levels (e.g. gun violence, human trafficking, mental health, substance use).  Local, national and international perspectives on violence and violent behavior will be addressed.  Because violence perpetration and victimization are most problematic for children, youth and young adults, the focus of the course will be on those age groups, although we will also discuss problems of violence among adults (e.g. sexual violence, offender reentry).  Attention will be given to new areas of research such as the neurobiology of violent behavior.  Individual differences, culture, and vulnerabilities related to violence perpetration and victimization will be explored. The course will discuss ways that violence affects individuals, families, systems, cultures, and society as a whole and the role of social work and public health in addressing violence of various types.
SASS 534	Theoretical Contexts Shaping Community Practice	3 Units	The aim of the course is to provide students in the Community Practice for Social Change concentration with a thorough overview and analysis of the range of individual, group, organizational and community-level theories that inform our practice with organizations, neighborhoods, communities, social institutions and policies.  The course seeks to help students: (1) develop an appreciation of the main traditions, theoretical debates, experiences and research findings in community practice both as a change process and as an interdisciplinary field; (2) identify the key ideological assumptions underlying these theories with attention to the broader historical, economic, social, demographic, institutional and political influences that affect these assumptions as well as resultant practice both in the United States and internationally; (3) identify, articulate and apply theories of change through the practice of theorizing; and (4) understand and apply logic models for community problem solving.  The course emphasizes application of theory to practice settings and developing skills and competencies for community work in diverse settings.
SASS 535	Human Sexuality	3 Units	The course addresses sexuality as an integral part of human functioning and human relationships throughout the life cycle. The formation of sexual identity is addressed, including gender identity, sexual orientation, and sexual intention. The physiological and psychological aspects of sexual behavior are covered, including the effects of aging, chronic illness, and sexually transmitted diseases. The course concludes with practical applications for social work, including an overview of assessment and treatment of sexual dysfunction. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 440.
SASS 536	Individual Research Practicum	3 Units	With instructor and research sequence chair approval, an individual program of supervised research experience may be undertaken. This course allows the student to tailor a program of applied research to a specific practice issue or program. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 426.
SASS 538	Evidence-Based Practice: Selection, Implementation, and Practice Issues	3 Units	This course prepares students to critically assess and reflect on evidence-based practice theory, principles, and practice issues as they relate to social work. Students will integrate knowledge of assessment and clinical treatment theories with the growing research and science base of evidence-based practice.  The course will focus on multiple levels of evidence-based practice promotion including the individual level, the programmatic and agency level, and the broader market place contexts. In the beginning of the course, students will be introduced to the history and background of the evidence-based practice movement, including definitions and terms. Students will also examine how to incorporate strategies optimizing client needs and circumstances into the EBP decision-making process, and to think critically about how to ensure that their practice adheres to social work values and ethics. Students will learn issues and strategies for locating, selecting, and evaluating EBP practice research, including the selection of EBPs tailored to a specific client or population.  On the programmatic and agency levels, students will examine core implementation components and challenges (e.g., planning, educating, financing, restructuring, managing quality, attending to policy) commonly faced in agency practice by clinicians, supervisors and administrators. As students are exposed to the implementation science literature and research, they will appreciate how key multilevel implementation approaches can be designed and applied to promote health and behavioral health innovation on both the prevention and intervention levels. Finally, students will review that EBP landscape from a broader perspectives including prevention science, and the diffusion of innovations, examining important controversies and market trends that influence and impact contemporary evidence-based practice in social work. Prereq: Advanced Standing or (SASS 477 and SASS 478) or (SASS 504 and SASS 507 and SASS 508 and SASS 509).
SASS 539	Early Intervention: Theories and Practice	1 - 3 Units	This course both describes the characteristics of young children with disabilities and examines the intervention models and practices that are used to address the developmental and social-emotional needs of these children.  The course describes the legislative and philosophical foundations for contemporary early intervention practice.  It discusses the meaning of evidence based practice and examines contemporary early intervention practices from this perspective.  The readings and assignments for this course have been designed to reflect the course objectives.
SASS 542	Evaluating Programs and Practice	3 Units	This course prepares social work students in all specializations to critically evaluate the practice and programs that they are involved in. It builds upon the evidence informed practice course in the generalist curriculum and deepens and expands this content as applicable at the advanced practice level. Students learn to use evidence-based research methodology and findings to inform their social work practice. Students will learn to evaluate their practice within their field setting.   Students will learn to use single system design methods to evaluate social work interventions with individuals, families, and groups, learning about specifying the intended outcome of worker intervention, systematically collecting and analyzing client system outcome data throughout service delivery, and using this information to guide clinical and ethical decision making. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 426 or (SASS 503 and SASS 504 and SASS 507 and SASS 508 and SASS 509 and SASS 528).
SASS 543	Collaborative Practice I-A	0 Unit	Interprofessional education (IPE) "occurs when students or members of two or more professions learn with, from, and about each other to enable effective collaboration and improve health outcomes" (World Health Organization, 2010). Over the last decade there has been a growing emphasis on developing the ability of all professionals to more effectively communicate and collaborate in the care of individuals, families, communities, and populations in order to achieve the quadruple aim: enhancing the patient or client experience, improving population health outcomes, delivering more cost-effective care and improving the work life of health care professions. Given the importance of effective interprofessional teamwork, the accrediting bodies for all health professions and social work programs require that interprofessional education is integrated into the mandatory curriculum for all students. Therefore, Collaborative Practice I is a requirement for Case Western Reserve University health professions and social work students. Collaborative Practice I-A (CPI) focuses on achieving the quadruple aim through interprofessional collaboration. Specifically, students in this interprofessional service learning experience will learn teamwork skills through active participation in an authentic and meaningful community-based project that is focused on health and well-being for individuals, families, communities, and/or populations.  Collaborative Practice I-A serves as an introductory IPE course/experience for dental, genetic counseling, medical, nursing, nutrition, physician assistant, psychology, social work and speech-language pathology students at CWRU. By the end of the course/experience, students will have acquired basic readiness to participate in future interprofessional collaborative experiences. Collaborative Practice I-A and I-B is a required yearlong 1 credit course for all entering social work students. It is delivered in the Fall semester as a 0 credit course and Spring semester as a 1 credit course. Prereq: Enrolled in the Master of Social Work on-campus weekly program.
SASS 544	Collaborative Practice I-B	1 Unit	Interprofessional education (IPE) "occurs when students or members of two or more professions learn with, from, and about each other to enable effective collaboration and improve health outcomes" (World Health Organization, 2010). Over the last decade there has been a growing emphasis on developing the ability of all professionals to more effectively communicate and collaborate in the care of individuals, families, communities, and populations in order to achieve the quadruple aim: enhancing the patient or client experience, improving population health outcomes, delivering more cost-effective care and improving the work life of health care professions. Given the importance of effective interprofessional teamwork, the accrediting bodies for all health professions and social work programs require that interprofessional education is integrated into the mandatory curriculum for all students. Therefore, Collaborative Practice I-B is a requirement for Case Western Reserve University health professions and social work students. Collaborative Practice I-A and I-B (CPI) focuses on achieving the quadruple aim through interprofessional collaboration. Specifically, students in this interprofessional service learning experience will learn teamwork skills through active participation in an authentic and meaningful community-based project that is focused on health and well-being for individuals, families, communities, and/or populations.  Collaborative Practice I serves as an introductory IPE course/experience for dental, genetic counseling, medical, nursing, nutrition, physician assistant, psychology, social work and speech-language pathology students at CWRU. By the end of the course/experience, students will have acquired basic readiness to participate in future interprofessional collaborative experiences. Collaborative Practice I-A and I-B is a required yearlong 1 credit course for all entering social work students. It is delivered in the Fall semester as a 0 credit course and Spring semester as a 1 credit course. Prereq: SASS 543.
SASS 545	Program Design	3 Units	Program design and development are of critical importance in nonprofit organizations.  In this course students will gain a practical, hands-on understanding of strategies for designing programs.  The course focuses on program development approaches that attempt to maximize a program's relevance to the need being addressed and increase the likelihood that the program will attain its identified outcomes.  Emphasis is placed on learning to understand a community's need/problem, reviewing evidence on potential strategies and identifying promising practices, anticipating potential implementation challenges and addressing them, and identifying potential funders.  The link between program design and the development of effective program proposals is stressed.  Through this course students will have the opportunity to design a program using a specific analytic framework.  Students will learn: (1) to address the demands of multiple constituencies and competing values in program development process, (2) skills for developing and implementing programs in the nonprofit sector, and (3) to examine issues of diversity as they affect organizations and community efforts and explore personal values and ethics as these influence programs and interventions.
SASS 546	Poverty Strategies for Social Workers	3 Units	This course provides an understanding of poverty.  It examines poverty through an exploration of its causes, theory, policy strategies for its amelioration and practice implications.  The course investigates the impact of poverty on single individuals, families with children, minorities, and vulnerable populations. The course will examine welfare reform and its impact in bringing people out of poverty.   Students, in teams, will examine one facet of poverty--its theories, policies, impacts on individuals and families, potential solutions, and our approaches to the issues as social workers.  In addition to assigned texts and readings, the course will be supplemented by practitioners, organizers, and low-income persons addressing the issues of poverty. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 440 or (SASS 503 and SASS 504 and SASS 507).
SASS 547	Problem Identification, Screening and Assessment/Diagnosis	3 Units	This course will provide a bio-psycho-social approach to identification, screening, assessment and diagnoses of common psychosocial problems/dysfunctions experienced clients. This course introduces the student to the etiology, recognition and diagnoses of these problems in the context of social work practice. Through use of a competency-based model, students will be introduced to techniques used to screen, assess and diagnose problems such as serious mental illness, suicidality, depression and anxiety, substance abuse, child abuse, elder abuse, and exposure trauma.  Students will also become familiar with the use of the DSM IV TR in providing axis I diagnostic formulations.  A skills-based approach will be used in presenting students with specific screening, assessment and diagnostic protocols. This course is designed to incorporate a range of issues associated with stages across the lifespan from childhood to late life. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 477 or (SASS 502 and SASS 504 and SASS 508 and SASS 509).
SASS 548	International Social Work	3 Units	This is an advanced seminar designed for students interested in the international dimensions of the social work profession and social work practice. The seminar focuses on commonalities and differences in the roles and functions of social workers in different nations. It also gives attention to social work as a global profession and social work practice on an international level. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 477 or (SASS 502 and SASS 504 and SASS 508 and SASS 509).
SASS 549	Theory/Practice Approaches in Direct Practice Social Work	3 Units	This required, three credit course introduces selected theories and practice approaches commonly used in social work with individuals, families and groups. The course is designed to provide students with knowledge of theoretical explanations and practice frameworks commonly used in direct social work practice. The course also encourages students to apply critical thinking skills to theory and its practical applications. Case presentations, class discussions and assignments will require students to apply various theoretical perspectives to common problems and issues in social work practice. The course will highlight the use of professional social work values and attention to human development issues, diversity and cultural perspectives as they apply in each theory or framework. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 477 or (SASS 502 and SASS 504 and SASS 508 and SASS 509).
SASS 550	Trauma Informed Social Work Practice with Children & Families	3 Units	This course builds on foundation direct practice courses and focuses specifically on children, adolescents and families affected by trauma. It uses both a developmental and an ecological systems perspective recognizing that in order to successfully treat trauma, it is important to not only focus on the individual but also on the family and the larger community environment of which the child or adolescent is a part. It is designed to foster an understanding of the neurobiology of trauma as well as to develop specific skills in interviewing children, child assessment including case formulation, selection of appropriate interventions, and using specific intervention strategies at different levels of the trauma system. Rather than teaching one specific intervention model, students will develop an understanding the importance of using the empirical literature, critical thinking skills, and clinical judgment to determine how to best intervene. The issues of ethically and culturally competent practice are emphasized throughout the course in each content area. Finally, the impact of secondary trauma on the practitioner is acknowledged and students develop plans for self-care. Prereq: Advanced Standing or (SASS 502 and SASS 504 and SASS 508 and SASS 509 and SASS 515).
SASS 554	Trauma Informed Social Work Practice with Adults	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to provide students with an in-depth understanding of both trauma theory and the neurobiology of trauma, expanding practice knowledge to include the assessment and treatment of adult survivors of multiple forms of trauma.  Different types of traumatic exposure will be explored to understand the impact of trauma symptoms and disorders, providing appropriate trauma informed evidence-based and evidence-supported intervention strategies. An emphasis will be placed on the emotional/behavioral manifestations of trauma as well as the physiological effects of trauma within the body. The course will begin with an overview of different types of trauma and will make a distinction between posttraumatic reactions and the development of posttraumatic stress disorders, with a focus on complex traumatic stress as opposed to "classic" PTSD. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 477 or (SASS 502 and SASS 504 and SASS 508 and SASS 509).
SASS 555	Women's Issues	3 Units	This course examines theories that are relevant to the development and socialization of women, and discusses issues that are relevant to women's lives within the context of oppression based on sexism, racism, ageism, homophobia, and other forms of discrimination. Emphasis is placed on assisting students in becoming more aware of the issues that are specifically relevant to their own development and socialization, and preparing for effective and sensitive professional practice by increasing knowledge about the issues facing women. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 440.
SASS 561	Community Practice Policy: Analyzing and Changing Social Policy	3 Units	This course teaches knowledge, values and skills for analyzing and changing social policy.  The course uses a policy practice framework to examine the development and implementation of community and social policy and to prepare students to participate in policy change.  A Policy Practice Project provides an opportunity for students to develop skills in planning, advocacy, and policy development.  Students work in groups to develop and implement a change strategy targeted at the agency or community level.  Course content includes policy analysis, logic models, and advocacy methods.  The course will also cover essential social policies relevant to community practice including place based and population based policies for improving communities such as community development, employment and housing policies.
SASS 562	Social Work Intervent in Co-occurring Mental and Substance Abuse Disor	3 Units	This advanced methods course provides a basic orientation to substance use disorders in persons with mental illness. A biopsychosocial framework will be used to explore the etiology, the maintenance, and the recovery of both mental and substance use disorders. The historical background of practitioner, programmatic, and institutional barriers that impede the development and application of clinical skills to dually diagnosed individuals will be explored. Emphasis will be placed on strategies for the implementation of services to deal with individuals with co-occurring problems and their families using the Integrated Treatment model. This model helps people address both disorders at the same time in the same organization, and is evidence based. Current assessment techniques and treatment of special populations including, but not limited to: women, minorities, and adolescents will be discussed. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 477 or (SASS 502 and SASS 504 and SASS 508 and SASS 509).
SASS 564	Social Work Practice in Alcohol and Other Drug Abuse	3 Units	SASS 564 is an advanced direct practice concentration course focused upon knowledge, skills and values important for social work practice with people who abuse alcohol and other drugs.  The content of SASS 564 directly builds upon the generalist curriculum and the required advanced course (SASS 547). SASS 564 takes a bio-psycho-social approach to prevention, assessment and treatment of alcohol and other drug abuse (AODA) problems.  This course introduces the student to the etiology and treatment of alcohol and other drug abuse in the context of social work practice. The historical background and the development of the evidence base of alcohol and other drug treatment interventions, self-help groups, and conceptual models of addiction will be presented. Students will explore their own attitudes and values toward AODA problems and how these affect treatment outcome as well as the development of programs. Emphasis will be placed on current screening and assessment techniques and prevention and treatment issues in social work practice with alcohol and other drug abuse. The course will use case materials to illustrate similarities and differences among various populations including minority/ethnic identity groups. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 477 or (SASS 502 and SASS 504 and SASS 508).
SASS 566	Assessing and Engaging Community for Community Change	3 Units	This course enables the student to become a change agent in their organization and community. This course advances multiple theories (critical social theory, community capitals theory, conflict theory) and methods of community practice for social workers as agents of social change. This course builds on foundational theories and research methods, instructing students on applied community facilitation, planning, and organizing models and skills. We will examine strategies of community building and organizing, focusing on communities and organizations as a means of fostering social change and improving the quality of life for individuals and families, especially in historically marginalized communities. Students will learn frameworks and models of community building and community organizing, focusing on the role of the change agent and the change process in the context of structural racism, privilege, and inequity. Prereq: Advanced Standing or (SASS 502 and SASS 503 and SASS 504 and SASS 507 and SASS 509).
SASS 567	Strategic Power Building with Communities	3 Units	This course will prepare students to design an organizing campaign to build grassroots power among those who have been historically marginalized and among constituents within a community and to effectively use that power to leverage social change. Students will explore and share learnings from several traditions of organizing including those for civil rights, labor, neighborhood work, anti-colonial struggles, and consciousness raising. The course will explore a variety of different approaches including organizing institutions, social movements, and organizing campaigns around specific issues or in conjunction with other approaches for social change. It will also examine the opportunities and ethical considerations of organizing within a variety of important contexts including various community geographies, online/offline, and working with social service participants and agencies.
SASS 569	Planning & Implementing Social Change	3 Units	This course builds skills for the design, planning and implementation of social change.  The focus of this course is on promoting social change through more strategic and impactful planning, positioning and partnerships. The premise of this course is that the impact and sustainability of programs, initiatives and other change efforts can be strengthened through more effective planning, better strategic positioning and organizational adaptation to external circumstances and trends, and stronger collaborations and partnerships. Students will strengthen their ability to work effectively within organizations, in collaborations and coalitions, and within communities and systems. Course content includes the development of theories of change and action, logic, models, strategic planning, organizational assessment, strategic positioning, collaboration and coalition building, systems reform, and effective working relationships with funders and local intermediaries.  A service learning assignment with a community partner.
SASS 575	Travel and Study Seminar	3 Units	This course acquaints the student with the socio-political factors that influence the development of social welfare systems in a selected country and the impact of these systems on the development and functioning of individuals, families, groups, or communities.  The role of the emerging social work profession in social change is explored via the social welfare system.  Topics focus on the health care, mental health, aging, child, and/or educational systems and are oriented towards direct practice, management, or community development.
SASS 576	Integrative Seminar in Alcohol and Other Drug Abuse Treatment	3 Units	This course is an advanced level course in the Alcohol and Other Drug Abuse Specialization that provides opportunities for students to increase their knowledge of topics in the areas of assessment, diagnosis and treatment of alcohol and other drug disorders.  The seminar builds upon course material in Foundation Methods (477) and in the advanced methods course (SASS 549 and SASS 564).  The seminar is intended to help students understand the evidence base for the treatment of substance use disorders and to explore selected areas of social work practice in intervention in the context of that evidence.  Community applications of theory and techniques are stressed.  The integrative Seminar in AODA Treatment uses a seminar format and provides students the opportunity to interact with treatment professionals from various treatment and practice settings.  The seminar formal also facilitates individual learning: each student selects his or her own topic to pursue in depth.  Each student is responsible for leading a minimum of one seminar presentation.  Each student will select the topic for the seminar in consultation with the instructor. Prereq: SASS 516 and SASS 562 and SASS 564.
SASS 579	Cognitive Behavioral Interventions	3 Units	This course acquaints students with the theoretical, conceptual, and skill bases of several cognitive-behavioral approaches to practice. Topics include assessment, use of tasks and homework, coping skills, cognitive restructuring, and problem solving approaches to practice. The course draws upon students' field and work experiences to illustrate the application of the concepts and skills under discussion. Prereq:  Advanced Standing or SASS 477 or (SASS 502 and SASS 504 and SASS 508 and SASS 509).
SASS 580	Social Work Practice in Mental Health: Children and Adolescents	3 Units	This advanced methods course builds on the content from required foundation social work methods, policy and human development courses including Direct Practice Methods and Skills, Mental Health Policy and Service Delivery. This course complements the content of advanced methods courses including Social Work with People Who Have Chronic Mental Illness, Social Work in Child Abuse and Family Violence, and Interventions in Alcohol and Other Drug Abuse.  This course develops biopsychosocial knowledge and intervention techniques related to professional settings specializing in child and adolescent mental health: hospitals, child guidance agencies, family service agencies, mental health centers, and residential treatment centers.  Students learn to use development and clinical theory to guide interventions while, maximizing individual strengths, social work treatment centers.  Students learn to use development and clinical theory to guide interventions while, maximizing individual strengths, social work values and ethics, and empowerment.  Social and economic risk factors, such as poverty, discrimination, and oppression, are considered in the intervention process and in the utilization of mental health services.  In addition, students learn to think critically about the myriad ways cultural diversity influences parenting, child and adolescent norms and expectations.  Students utilize assessment skills, coupled with knowledge of development and clinical theory to explore clinical case studies. Prereq: Advanced Standing or (SASS 440 and SASS 477) or (SASS 502 and SASS 504 and SASS 508 and SASS 509).
SASS 581	Social Work Practice with Older Adults	3 Units	This course is an advanced methods course that builds on the knowledge gained in Foundation Methods.  The content of SASS 581 directly builds upon the foundation direct practice course (SASS 477) and the required advanced course in screening and assessment (SASS 547).  It is also a required course in the Aging Specialization for the MSSA.  The course will focus on the persistent principles and emerging emphases in direct practice with older adults and their families.  Students will be asked to develop a model of practice based on knowledge of this unique population, social work values, and practice concepts.  The course includes special issues in assessment, strengths-base case management, and intervention approaches known to be effective with emotional disorders in older adults. Prereq:  Advanced Standing or SASS 477 or (SASS 502 and SASS 504 and SASS 508 and SASS 509).
SASS 582	Social Work in Child Abuse and Family Violence	3 Units	This course addresses the etiology, investigation, and treatment of child abuse including sexual abuse and the roles of child welfare, health, and mental health agencies. Particular attention is given to direct work with children and adults who have experienced abuse, and to interventions in instances of family violence. Prereq: Advanced Standing or (SASS 440 and SASS 477) or (SASS 502 and SASS 504 and SASS 508).
SASS 583	Social Work Practice in Mental Health Adults	3 Units	This advanced methods course builds on the content from required foundation social work methods, policy, and advanced sociobehavioral theory courses including Direct Practice Methods and Skills, Mental Health Policy and Service Delivery, Advanced Child and Adolescent Development and Dysfunction, and Adult Psychopathology.  This course complements the content of advanced methods courses including Social Work with People Who Have Chronic Mental Illness, Social Work in Child Abuse and Family Violence, and Interventions in Alcohol and Other Drug Abuse.  This course develops biopsychosocial knowledge and intervention techniques related to professional settings specializing in child and adolescent mental health: hospitals, child guidance agencies, family service agencies, mental health centers, and residential treatment centers.  Students learn to use development and clinical theory to guide interventions while, maximizing individual strengths, social work values and ethics, and empowerment.  Social and economic risk factors, such as poverty, discrimination, and oppression, are considered in the intervention process and in the utilization of mental health services.   In addition, students learn to think critically about the myriad ways cultural diversity influences parenting, child and adolescent norms and expectations.  Students utilize assessment skills, coupled with knowledge of development and clinical theory to explore clinical case studies. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 477 or (SASS 502 and SASS 504 and SASS 508 and SASS 509).
SASS 584	Integrative Seminar in Mental Health: Children and Adolescents	3 Units	Integrative Seminar in Mental Health: Children and Adolescents is an advanced level course, a capstone course in the Mental Health Child and Adolescent Specialization, that provides opportunities for students to increase their knowledge of assessment, diagnosis and treatment.  This course builds on the course material in SASS 580, SASS 477, SASS 549, and SASS 576.  The seminar is intended to help students integrate theory and practice, especially in the context of public mental health and community-based, social service practice.  The integrative Seminar in Social Work Practice with Children and Adolescents uses a seminar format facilitates individual learning and promotes a learning-to practice, reflective approach.  The seminar assumes there are numerous evidenced-based models and practices and focuses student learning on the role of the professional use of self in the implementation of theory, technique, model, or intervention.
SASS 585	Social Work with Groups	3 Units	A theoretical formulation of the social group work method as a problem solving process is addressed. Exercises are presented in the use of diagnostic skills to determine individual needs and problems for which groups may be helpful, the worker's role in facilitating group functioning through his/her use of various program media. Attention is given to the significance of goals, agency environment, and policy for direct work with groups. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 477 or (SASS 502 and SASS 504 and SASS 508 and SASS 509).
SASS 586	Social Work with Couples	3 Units	This course provides an overview of assessment and intervention methods for working with couples around issues of marriage, divorce, and remarriage. Alternate couple forms are discussed. The course emphasizes systems and social learning approaches, communication and negotiation in problem solving and its relevance to assessment, treatment structure, and techniques. Special attention will be given to problem areas such as commitment, sexual dysfunction, chemical dependency, and destructive communication patterns. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 477.
SASS 587	Integrative Seminar in Mental Health: Adults	3 Units	The Integrative Seminar in Social Work Practice with Adults is an advanced level course, a capstone course in the Mental Health Adult Specialization, that provides opportunities for students to increase their knowledge of assessment, diagnosis and treatment.  This course builds on course material in SASS 583, SASS 477, and SASS 576.   The seminar is intended to help students integrate theory and practice, especially in the context of public mental health and community-based, social service practice.   The Integrative Seminar in Social Work Practice with Adults uses a seminar format and provides students the opportunity to interact with professionals, from various treatment and practice settings.  The seminar format facilitates individual learning and promotes a learning to practice, reflective approach.  The seminar assumes there are numerous evidenced-based models and practices and focuses student learning on the role of the professional use of self in the implementation of theory, technique, model, or intervention. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 583.
SASS 589	Advanced Social Work Practice In Integrated Healthcare	3 Units	The objective of this course is to introduce social work students to the direct practice of integrated behavioral health in primary care settings.  Students will become knowledgeable of the roles of behavioral health providers working in healthcare settings, theories and models of care, and cross-cultural issues.  They will develop skills in engagement, assessment, intervention, planning and implementation, and practice evaluation.  Because the populations served in primary care settings span the continuum of severity in both the physical and behavioral health dimensions, students will develop competencies in engaging and supporting diverse patients across a range of health conditions. Prereq: Advanced Standing or SASS 477 or (SASS 502 and SASS 504 and SASS 508).
SASS 590	Field Practice	1 - 12 Units	
SASS 594	Independent Study Abroad	0 - 12 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
SASS 598	Individual Reading	1 - 12 Units	Special written permission needed. See MSASS registrar.
SASS 601	Field Education I	2 Units	The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field related opportunities to develop foundation level competencies in the eight abilities by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values and ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting. These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent developing practitioners. The field instructor is based at the social service setting and provides the direct instruction of the student. The faculty advisor, who is based at the School, serves as a link between all parties, interprets the requirements and standards of the School, and participates and consults in the design of the student's learning experience. The field instructor assigns tasks to the student according to the requirements of the School and the educational and experiential level of the student. Student, field instructor, and faculty field advisor all participate in various ways in the evaluation of the student's work; the faculty advisor is responsible for assigning the grade.
SASS 602	Field Education II	3 Units	This course is designed to be taken by entering Advanced Standing students in the first semester of their master's program and by Foundation level social work students in the second semester of their master's program. It consists of a field practicum and participation in professional development opportunities. For students entering the program with advanced standing, there is an additional requirement of four logs and an integrative assignment, and periodic meetings with a field faculty advisor in addition to the field conference. The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field related opportunities to continue to develop foundation level competencies in the eight abilities by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values, and ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting. The periodic meetings with the field faculty advisor are designed to provide students with an opportunity to integrate classroom and field learning. These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent, developing practitioners.  Students spend 300 hours in field and professional development in SASS 602. Prereq: SASS 495 and SASS 601.
SASS 603	Field Education III	3 Units	The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field related opportunities to continue to develop advanced level competencies in their area of concentration in the eight abilities by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values and ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting. The periodic meetings with the field faculty advisor are designed to provide students with an opportunity to integrate classroom and field learning. These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent, developing practitioners.  Students spend 300 hours in field and professional development in SASS 603. Prereq: SASS 602 or equivalent.
SASS 603A	Field Education III	3 Units	This course is designed to be taken by students with Advanced Standing entering Field Education in their first semester of their master's program. The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field related opportunities to develop the required specialized level competencies by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values, ethics and cognitive & effective processes acquired in the classroom in an agency setting. These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop and refine social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent developing practitioners. Prereq: Advanced Standing.
SASS 604	Field Education IV	3 Units	This course is designed to be taken by students in their advanced course of study. It consists of a field practicum and participation in professional development opportunities. The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field related opportunities to continue to develop advanced level competencies in their area of concentration in the eight abilities by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values and ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting. The periodic meetings with the field faculty advisor are designed to provide students with an opportunity to integrate classroom and field learning. These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent, developing practitioners.  Student, field instructor, and field faculty advisor all participate in the evaluation of the student's work; the faculty advisor is responsible for assigning the grade.  Students spend 300 hours in field and professional development in SASS 604. Prereq: SASS 495A and SASS 603.
SASS 604A	Field Education IV	3 Units	This course is designed to be taken by specialized level advanced standing social work students, generally in the third or fourth semester of their master's program. The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field related opportunities to develop the required specialized level competencies by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values, ethics and cognitive & affective processes acquired in the classroom in an agency setting. These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop and refine social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent developing practitioners. Prereq: SASS 603A and SASS 497A.
SASS 608	Philosophy of Science and Theory Building	3 Units	This is a required foundation course. The nature of theory is examined. Inductive and deductive methods for knowledge building are reviewed. Course content draws from philosophy of science as well as empirical and phenomenological research.
SASS 609	Theories of Social Welfare and Social Justice	3 Units	This is a foundation course required for all students. Theories of social welfare and social justice are examined. Course content draws from moral philosophy, economics, political science, cultural anthropology, sociology, history, psychology, and social welfare theory and provides students with a broad orientation to the field of theoretical social welfare.
SASS 610	Theories of Human Behavior: Macro and Micro Dimensions	3 Units	This is a required, foundation course and is designed to help students acquire a critical and reflective approach to theory in social work research and practice.  The course provides a broad overview of theoretical perspectives at the individual, group, community, organizational and/or societal levels and addresses major theoretical perspectives used in social work and social welfare research.
SASS 612	Evaluative Research	3 Units	This is an advanced research methods course focusing on the techniques and principles of evaluation research. Emphasis will be on methods of evaluation and research design, instrument development, and data collection techniques within a public/applied setting. Additionally, students will become familiar with the policy implications and consequences of evaluation research. Focus will be placed on using evaluative research to build students' scholarship/research careers.
SASS 613	Advanced Research Design	3 Units	This foundation course in research methods is required of all students.  It is a prerequisite to the quantitative and qualitative courses.  Topics covered include operationalization of variables, threats to validity, and experimental, quasi-experimental and non-experimental research design.
SASS 614	Models of Qualitative Research	3 Units	This required course introduces students to the principles, approaches, methods, and analytical techniques utilized when conducting qualitative research in the social sciences. Five models of qualitative research design and methodology are studied, including narrative analysis, case study, ethnography, and grounded theory and phenomenology. This course is designed to provide students with the tools to critically evaluate as well as to enhance the academic rigor or "quality" of qualitative data. Prereq: SASS 608 and SASS 613.
SASS 615	Social Statistics and Data Analysis	3 Units	This foundation course (or its equivalent) is required of all students. Content includes univariate, bivariate and inferential statistics, and the use of electronic data processing technology to manage and analyze data.
SASS 616	Applied Regression and the Linear Model	3 Units	This is a required course in the research methods sequence for MSASS doctoral students. At the end of this course, students will be able to apply ordinary least squares regression and logistic regression in the analysis of social science data. They will learn to formulate research questions and hypotheses, specify statistical models, carry out the appropriate analyses, interpret their findings, and communicate their results clearly and effectively. Prereq: SASS 613 and SASS 615.
SASS 618	Measurement Issues in Quantitative Research	3 Units	This required course covers the operationalization of social science concepts and development of methods for their measurement. Issues covered include index and scale construction, validity, reliability, questionnaire design, factor analysis, measurement error, and missing data. Prereq: SASS 613 and SASS 615.
SASS 619	Structural Equation Modeling	3 Units	This advanced-level, elective statistics course focuses on the family of analytical techniques referred to as structural equation modeling (SEM).  SEM covers both measurement models (e.g., confirmatory factor analysis) and structural models.  The course covers theoretical and methodological considerations and preliminary data screening necessary to ascertain whether SEM would be an appropriate technique; terminology and notation specific to SEM; statistical assumptions and strategies for assessing and remedying possible violations; use of SEM to conduct confirmatory factor analysis; use of SEM to test structural models, including mediation models; advanced models (e.g., multiple-group, longitudinal, dyadic, to be determined by student interests); how to critique SEM analyses and identify common problems; statistical power; and best practices for reporting SEM analyses and results. AMOS will be used to conduct the SEM analyses and SPSS to conduct preliminary analyses. The course uses a combination of readings, class discussion, lecture, written assignments, and hands-on computer labs. Prereq: SASS 613, SASS 615, SASS 616 and SASS 618.
SASS 623	Research Synthesis & Systematic Review Methodology	3 Units	This course will provide advanced skill development of systematic review methodology and will combine didactic sessions with in-class laboratory sessions where students will be taught how to perform each step in a review. Students will conduct their own systematic review resulting in a final product of a systematic literature review manuscript that is ready for submission to a peer-reviewed journal. The purpose of this course is to (1) develop student's methodological skills in how to conduct a systematic literature review and (2) train students on how to analyze, integrate, and synthesize a body of literature.   By the end of the course, students should have achieved the following objectives: -Identify a suitable research topic for the preparation of a systematic review -Systematically search and identify literature  -Code and collect data from identified studies -Analyze and interpret patterns of evidence across studies -Write about the body of literature in an integrated and synthesized manner -Present systematic literature review findings in a manuscript format ready for submission to a peer-reviewed journal  Students who wish to take this course as a Fellowship Course must follow the School of Graduate Studies policy and submit an application (http://case.edu/gradstudies/currentstudents/forms/). This application requires permission of the instructor, the student's faculty advisor, and the School of Graduate Studies. Students taking the course as a Fellowship Course are expected to meet all course requirements and prerequisites. Prereq: SASS 613.
SASS 630	Seminar on Social Work Education	3 Units	This required seminar examines the structure and content of social work education within the context of higher education in American society. Emphasis is placed on curriculum design and course development. The course also is designed to help students develop a strategic approach to teaching based on learning theory. Finally, attention is given to current issues and future directions for social work education.
SASS 631	Job Seekers Seminar	3 Units	This dynamically dated seminar is designed to prepare doctoral students for a successful academic job search.  The course objectives include: Obtaining knowledge about where to find academic job postings and how to determine appropriate fit; understanding the job search process; developing application materials; practicing mock interviews and mock job talks; and, developing a strategy for a successful first year as a professor. Prereq: Advanced to Candidacy.
SASS 632	Research Project	3 Units	This elective course provides students with the opportunity to work with specific faculty engaged in research studies either on an individual or group basis. Prereq: 614 and SASS 615.
SASS 637	Individual Reading	1 - 9 Units	This is an elective individual reading course permitting students to select areas of interest and pursue these interests with specific faculty.
SASS 638	Integrative Seminar	Research Development for Social Welfare Scholars	1 Unit	Social work is, historically, an inclusive and diverse discipline that draws from multiple traditions to focus scholarship and research to address social justice and social change. The field of social work is in a period of critical self-reflection, strategy-setting (e.g. the Grand Challenges), and transformation. Developing scholars of social welfare will enter into an increasingly transdisciplinary research landscape that requires training opportunities that align with trends in the field, including capacity and readiness to engage in team science, interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary teams, translations of research evidence to policy, and partnerships with multiple stakeholders. The purpose of this year-long integrative seminar is to provide a forum for developing social welfare scholars to engage in an active learning community across cohorts. The community is designed to actively engage in developing dimensions of social welfare researchers that are common to all of us, although we have varied research aims, populations, change goals, and disciplinary and/or system/community partners. The seminar uses a range of formats (e.g. invited speakers, discussion panels, and student working sessions) and is designed to offer flexible responsiveness to challenges that doctoral students are experiencing, and beyond the normative bounds of standing courses or project activities. This course is purposefully cross-cohort, from first year students through dissertation active students. The aim is to foster a sense of collegiality, peer mentorship, and doctoral student community.
SASS 639	Independent Study for Early Teaching Support	0 Unit	Doctoral candidates are required to complete SASS 630: Seminar on Social Work Education in fall semester of the second year, and during that semester or immediately following, to complete a non-credit teaching mentorship with a full-time faculty. Following the mentorship and with judged readiness to teach independently, the student will request that the Associate Dean for Academic Affairs assign the student an undergraduate or graduate course to teach independently. This course is designed to be taken concurrently with the candidate's independent teaching experiences.  In rare instances, and with permission of the Chair of the Doctoral Program (or permission of the instructor), it may be taken prior to or concurrently with SASS 630.  The course is offered in fall and spring. The course may be repeated during the candidate's first three teaching experiences for students entering Fall 2016, or later.
SASS 644	Critical Theories in Social Welfare	3 Units	This doctoral seminar focuses on the nature and role of theory in contemporary social welfare research and policy, informed by a central commitment to social justice and multiculturalism. It provides foundations in the socially constructed nature of theory and social 'problems' and in historical changes in conceptual and theoretical perspectives on human society, interactions, and policy in the social realm. Domains of interest encompass a range of theoretical perspectives and provide the opportunity for exploring the theoretical and meta-theoretical assumptions and models that frame social welfare and social science scholarship, research, and policy.   The overarching goal of this course is to help you develop a working knowledge of how theory, including metatheoretical assumptions and mid-level 'explanatory' theories shape social welfare and social science scholarship, research, and policy. Reviewing, critiquing, refining, and integrating theories is central to this process and thus we will devote much of the course to these tasks. Also central to this process if the linking of 'levels of theory' (i.e. metatheoretical assumptions; grand theory; and mid-level 'explanatory' theory) to the applied, i.e. contemporary social work practice and social welfare policy. To this end, the major assignment provides students with the opportunity for in-depth study of theoretical developments in a social welfare research domain of personal interest. Throughout the course, emphasis is placed on critical thinking, collegial engagement, and the conventions of formal scholarly practice.
SASS 651	Field Education I	2 Units	This course is designed to be taken by generalist level social work students without Advanced Standing in the second semester of their master's program. Students enrolled in SASS 651 take SASS 495V, Field Education Seminar concurrently. The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field related opportunities to develop the required generalist level competencies by helping students apply and integrate knowledge of social work theory, skills, knowledge, values, ethics and cognitive & affective processes acquired in the classroom within an agency setting.  These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent developing practitioners. The Field Instructor is based at the field site and provides direct instruction and supervision to the student.  The Field Faculty Advisor based at the Mandel School is the liaison between all parties, interprets the requirements and standards of the School, and participates and consults in the design of the student's learning experience.  The Field Instructor assigns tasks to the student according to the requirements of the School and the educational and experiential level of the student.  Student, Field Instructor,  and Field Faculty Advisor participate in the assessment and evaluation of the student's work. The Field Faculty Advisor is the course instructor and assigns all grades.  Students complete a total of 130 field hours in this course. Coreq: SASS 455.
SASS 651AV	Field Education I-AV	1 Unit	This course is designed to be taken by entering Non-Advanced Standing or foundation social work students after the successful completion of SASS495V of their master's program. The SASS 651AV course is 8 weeks in duration. The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field related opportunities to develop foundation level competencies in the eight abilities by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values and ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting. These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent developing practitioners. The field instructor is based at the social service setting and provides the direct instruction of the student. The faculty advisor, who is based at the School, serves as a link between all parties, interprets the requirements and standards of the School, and participates and consults in the design of the student's learning experience. The field instructor assigns tasks to the student according to the requirements of the School and the educational and experiential level of the student. Student, field instructor, and faculty field advisor all participate in various ways in the evaluation if student's work; the faculty advisor is responsible for assigning the grade. Students spend 75 hours in field and professional development in SASS 651AV. Prereq: SASS 495V.
SASS 651BV	Field Education I-BV	1 Unit	This course is designed to be taken by entering Non-Advanced Standing social work students in the second semester of their master's program. The SASS 651BV course is 8 weeks in duration. The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field related opportunities to develop foundation level competencies in the eight abilities by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values and ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting. These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent, developing practitioners. The field instructor is based at the social service setting and provides the direct instruction of the student. The faculty advisor, who is based at the School, services as a link between all parties, interprets the requirements and standards of the School, and participates and consults in the design of the student's learning experiences. The field instructor assigns tasks to the student according to the requirement of the School and the educational and experiential level of the student. Student, field instructor, and faculty field advisor all participate in various ways in the evaluation of student's work; the faculty advisor is responsible for assigning the grade. Students spend 75 hours in field and professional development in SASS 651BV. Prereq: SASS 651AV.
SASS 652A	Field Education II-A	1.5 Unit	This course is designed to be taken by Non-Advanced Standing social work students in the third semester of their master's program.  The SASS 652A course is 16 weeks in duration.  It consists of a field practicum and participation in professional development opportunities.  For students entering the program with advanced standing, there is an additional requirement of four logs and an integrative assignment, and periodic meetings with a field faculty advisor in addition to the field conference.  The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field related opportunities to continue to develop foundation level competencies in the eight abilities by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values, and ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting.  The periodic meetings with the field faculty advisor are designed to provide students with an opportunity to integrate classroom and field learning.  These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent, developing practitioners.  Students spend 130 hours in field in SASS 652A. Prereq: SASS 455 and SASS 651.
SASS 652B	Field Education II-B	1.5 Unit	This course is designed to be taken by Non-Advanced Standing social work students in the fourth semester of their master's program.  The SASS 652B course is 16 weeks in duration.  It consists of a field practicum and participation in professional development opportunities.  For students entering the program with advanced standing, there is an additional requirement of four logs and an integrative assignment, and periodic meetings with a field faculty advisor in addition to the field conference.  The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field related opportunities to continue to develop foundation level competencies in the eight abilities by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values, and ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting.  The periodic meetings with the field faculty advisor are designed to provide students with an opportunity to integrate classroom and field learning.  These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent, developing practitioners.  Students spend 130 hours in field SASS 652B. Prereq: SASS 652A.
SASS 653A	Field Education III-A	1.5 Unit	This course is designed to be taken by students in their advanced course of study.  Advanced Standing social work students take this course in the second semester of their master's program.  Non-Advanced Standing social work students take it in the fifth semester of their master's program.  The SASS 653A course is 16 weeks in duration.  It consists of a field practicum and participation in professional development opportunities.  The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field related opportunities to continue to develop advanced level competencies in their area of concentration in the eight abilities by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values and ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting.  The periodic meetings with the field faculty advisor are designed to provide students with a forum to develop social work skills, opportunity to integrate classroom and field learning.  These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent, developing practitioners.  Advanced Standing students spend 120 hours in field in SASS 653A. Non-Advanced Standing students spend 130 hours in field in SASS 653A. Prereq: SASS 652A and SASS 652B.
SASS 653B	Field Education III-B	1.5 Unit	This course is designed to be taken by students in their advanced course of study.  Advanced Standing social work students take this course in the third semester of their master's program.  Non-Advanced Standing social work students take it in the sixth semester of their master's program.  The SASS 653B course is 16 weeks in duration.  It consists of a field practicum and participation in professional development opportunities.  The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field related opportunities to continue to develop advanced level competencies in their area of concentration in the eight abilities by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values and ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting.  The periodic meetings with the field faculty advisor are designed to provide students with a forum to develop social work skills, opportunity to integrate classroom and field learning.  These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent, developing practitioners.  Students spend 130 hours in field in SASS 653B. Prereq: SASS 653A.
SASS 654A	Field Education IV-A	1.5 Unit	This course is designed to be taken by students in their advanced course of study.  Advanced Standing social work students take this course in the fourth semester of their master's program.  Non-Advanced Standing social work students take it in the seventh semester of their master's program. The SASS 654A course is 16 weeks in duration.  It consists of a field practicum and participation in professional development opportunities. The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field related opportunities to continue to develop their advanced level competencies in their area of concentration in the eight abilities by helping students apply ethic acquired in the classroom in an agency setting.  The periodic meetings with the field faculty advisor are designed to provide students with an opportunity to integrate classroom and field learning.  These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent, developing practitioners.  Student, field instructor, and field faculty advisor all participate in the evaluation of the student's work; the faculty advisor is responsible for assigning the grade.  Students spend 130 hours in field in SASS 654A. Prereq: SASS 653A and SASS 653B.
SASS 654B	Field Education IV-B	1.5 Unit	This course is designed to be taken by students in their advanced course of study.  Advanced Standing social work students take this course in the fifth semester of their master's program.  Non-Advanced Standing social work students take it in the eight semester of their master's program.  The SASS 654B course is 16 weeks in duration.  It consists of a field practicum and participation in professional development opportunities.  The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field related opportunities to continue to develop their advanced level competencies in their area of concentration in the eight abilities by helping students apply ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting.  The periodic meetings with the field faculty advisor are designed to provide students with an opportunity to integrate classroom and field learning. These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent, developing practitioners.  Student, field instructor, and field faculty advisor all participate in the evaluation of the student's work; the faculty advisor is responsible for assigning the grade.  Students spend 120 hours in field in SASS 654B. Prereq: SASS 654A.
SASS 655	Dual Degree Field Practicum II	3 Units	This course is designed to be taken by MSSA/MPH joint degree students as the second field period of their master's program. It consists of a field practicum and participation in professional development opportunities. The Field Practicum is an integral component of the MSASS and MPH curriculums, allowing students to apply, develop, and refine their conceptual knowledge and skills as part of a planned, supervised, and evaluated community-based experience. The Practicum is designed to move students beyond the walls of academia, to understand the political, economic, social, and organizational contexts within which social work and public health activities are conducted. These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent developing practitioners. (EPAAS Program Objective M6 and EPAAS Content Area 4.7) The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level MSSA/MPH joint degree students with field related opportunities to continue to develop foundation level competencies in the eight MSSAS abilities by helping students apply knowledge of social work and public health theory, skills, values and ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting. Offered as MPHP 655 and SASS 655. Prereq: SASS 601.
SASS 656	Dual Degree Field Capstone III	3 Units	The Public Health Capstone Project is an integral component of the MPH curriculum, allowing students to apply, develop, and refine their conceptual knowledge and skills as part of a planned, mentored, and evaluated public health scholarly project. This course is designed to be taken by advanced level students. It consists of a 288 hour field based Capstone experience and participation in 12 hours of professional development opportunities. The overall goal of this course is designed to move students beyond the walls and constraints of the classroom, to understand the political, economic, social, and organizational contexts within which public health and social work activities are conducted. It is also designed  to provide graduate level dual degree students with field related opportunities to begin to develop advanced level competencies in the eight abilities by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values and ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting.     These collective experiences provide students with a forum to continue to develop and hone social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent developing practitioners. (EPAS Program Objective M6 and EPAS Content Area 4.7) Offered as SASS 656 and MPHP 656. Prereq: SASS 655.
SASS 657	Dual Degree Field Capstone IV	3 Units	The Public Health Capstone Project is an integral component of the MPH curriculum, allowing students to apply, develop, and refine their conceptual knowledge and skills as part of a planned, mentored, and evaluated public health scholarly project. This course is designed to be taken by advanced level students. It consists of a 288 hour field based Capstone experience and participation in 12 hours of professional development opportunities. The overall goal of this course is designed to move students beyond the walls and constraints of the classroom, to understand the political, economic, social, and organizational contexts within which public health and social work activities are conducted. It is also designed to provide graduate level dual degree students with field related opportunities to begin to develop advanced level competencies in the eight abilities by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values and ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting. Offered as MPHP 657 and SASS 657. Prereq: SASS 656 or MPHP656.
SASS 661	Field Education I	2 Units	This course is designed to be taken by entering generalist level social work students in the first semester of their master's program.  The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field related opportunities to develop the required generalist level competencies by helping students apply and integrate knowledge of social work theory, skills, knowledge, values, ethics and cognitive & affective processes acquired in the classroom within an agency setting.  These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent developing practitioners.  The Field Instructor is based at the field site and provides direct instruction and supervision to the student.  The Field Faculty Advisor based at the Mandel School is the liaison between all parties, interprets the requirements and standards of the School, and participates and consults in the design of the student's learning experience.  The Field Instructor assigns tasks to the student according to the requirements of the School and the educational and experiential level of the student.  Student, Field Instructor, Task Supervisor (if applicable) and Field Faculty Advisor participate in the assessment and evaluation of the student's work. The Field Faculty Advisor is the course instructor and assigns all grades.  This course is for Intensive Weekend Students only. Prereq: Enrolled in MSW Intensive Weekend program.
SASS 662A	Field Education II-A	1.5 Unit	The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field opportunities to develop the required generalist level competencies by helping students apply and integrate knowledge of social work theory, skills, knowledge, values, ethics and cognitive & affective processes acquired in the classroom within an agency setting. This course is for Intensive Weekend Students only. Coreq: SASS 466. Prereq: Enrolled in MSW Intensive Weekend program.
SASS 662B	Field Education II-B	1.5 Unit	The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field opportunities to develop the required generalist level competencies by helping students apply and integrate knowledge of social work theory, skills, knowledge, values, ethics and cognitive & affective processes acquired in the classroom within an agency setting. This course is for Intensive Weekend Students only. Prereq: SASS 662A.
SASS 663A	Field Education III-A	1.5 Unit	The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field opportunities to develop the required specialized level competencies by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values, ethics and cognitive & affective processes acquired in the classroom in an agency setting. These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop and refine social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent developing practitioners. This course is for Intensive Weekend Students only. Prereq: SASS 662B.
SASS 663B	Field Education III-B	1.5 Unit	The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field opportunities to develop the required specialized level competencies by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values, ethics and cognitive & affective processes acquired in the classroom in an agency setting. These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop and refine social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent developing practitioners. This course is for Intensive Weekend Students only. Prereq: SASS 663A.
SASS 664A	Field Education IV-A	1.5 Unit	This course is designed to be taken by students in their advanced course of study. It consists of a field practicum and participation in professional development opportunities. The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field related opportunities to continue to develop advanced level competencies in their area of concentration in the ten competencies by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values and ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting. These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent, developing practitioners. This course is for Intensive Weekend Students only. Prereq: SASS 663B.
SASS 664B	Field Education IV-B	1.5 Unit	This course is designed to be taken by students in their advanced course of study. It consists of a field practicum and participation in professional development opportunities. The overall goal of this course is to provide graduate level social work students with field related opportunities to continue to develop advanced level competencies in their area of concentration in the ten competencies by helping students apply knowledge of social work theory, skills, values and ethics acquired in the classroom in an agency setting. These collective experiences provide students with a forum to develop social work skills, integrate and operationalize the values and ethics inherent in professional practice, and confront social injustice as self-reflective, competent, developing practitioners. This course is for Intensive Weekend Students only. Prereq: SASS 664A.
SASS 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	This course is intended for students who have passed the qualifying examination and are actively working on their dissertation. Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
SASS 850	Collaborative Practice I	0 Unit	Collaborative Practice I (CPI) focuses on achieving the quadruple aim through inter-professional collaboration. Specifically, students in this inter-professional service learning experience will learn teamwork skills through active participation in an authentic and meaningful community-based project that is focused on health and well-being for individuals, families, communities, and/or populations. (Note that for some programs, Collaborative Practice I is a free-standing course. In other programs, it is an experience integrated into a larger course, block, or rotation. Therefore, in the syllabus we refer to Collaborative Practice I as a "course/experience." Collaborative Practice I serves as an introductory IPE course/experience for dental, genetic counseling, medical, nursing, nutrition, physician assistant, psychology, social work and speech-language pathology students at CWRU. By the end of the course/experience, students will have acquired basic readiness to participate in future inter-professional collaborative experiences.
LAWS 1101	Contracts	4 Units	The formation of a contract; problems of offer and acceptance; consideration; the question of contract breach; damages and remedies for a breach. Required.
LAWS 1102	Criminal Law	3 Units	A basic course in substantive criminal law, dealing with the standards to be used in defining and punishing criminal behavior. The course includes discussion of crimes and criminality; culpable mental states; causation; insanity; attempt and complicity; homicide; and rape. Required.
LAWS 1103	Torts	4 Units	This course covers compensation of an injured party for harm resulting from intentional or unintentional acts and omissions of others. Consideration is given to the rules, rationale, and policy underlying tort liability. The course includes analysis of assault and battery, false imprisonment, negligence, standard of care, duty, risk, causation, liabilities and rights of landowners and land users, liability relating to dangerous activities and defective products, liabilities arising from special relationships or specially recognized legal interests, and defenses. Required.
LAWS 1201	Civil Procedure	4 Units	A broad survey of the procedural development of a lawsuit is undertaken, tracing the various steps from pleading and discovery to trials and judgments. Modern procedural issues involved in jurisdiction of the courts, venue, choice of law, and former adjudications are discussed. Throughout the course principal attention is given to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. Required.
LAWS 1203	Property	4 Units	The nature of property interests; estates in land and future interests; concurrent ownership; landlord-tenant; transfer of property interests; easements, covenants, and equitable servitudes; nuisance; and zoning. Required.
LAWS 1204	Law, Legislation and Regulation	3 Units	Law, Legislation and Regulation is a required first-year course designed to introduce students to the structure of US government, the legislative process, principles of statutory interpretation, the operation of administrative agencies and regulatory process.
LAWS 1801	Legal Writing, Leadership, Experiential Learning, Advocacy, and Professionalism 1	3 Units	Students will study the fundamental lawyering skills of researching, analyzing, and writing about the law in LLEAP I (Fall semester of first year) and LLEAP 2 (Spring semester of first year.)   Skills include objective analysis and writing, complex factual and legal analysis and persuasive writing.  In the simulation portion of the course students will begin to develop the basic skills of client counseling and oral advocacy.
LAWS 1802	Legal Writing, Leadership, Experiential Learning, Advocacy, and Professionalism 2	3 Units	Students will study the fundamental lawyering skills of researching, analyzing, and writing about the law in LLEAP 1 (Fall semester of first year) and LLEAP 2 (Spring semester of first year). Skills include objective analysis and writing, complex factual and legal analysis and persuasive writing.  In the simulation portion of the course students will begin to develop the basic skills of client counseling and oral advocacy.  The LLEAP 2 course particularly focuses on  legal transactions.  Students will learn the basic principles of reading, analyzing and drafting a contract, including identifying and developing substantive deal terms and contractual processes that should be added to the contract, although not identified by the client.  By means of a simulated negotiation, the students will conduct a mock client interview and a business negotiation. Prereq: LAWS 1801.
LAWS 1901	International Law: Fundamentals	1 Unit	This course will examine the sources and nature of international law, as well as the processes by which international law is created, interpreted, and enforced.  It will also cover substantive areas of international law such as use of force, international criminal law, law of the sea, international environmental law, and human rights law.  The course utilizes simulations and role play exercises.  This foundational course will be required for any students undertaking a Cox Center funded international law internship during the summer after 1L year.  The course will also provide a provide a suitable foundation for taking any advanced international law course and is a required course for the International Law Concentration.
LAWS 1903	Contemporary Issues in Criminal Law Practice	1 Unit	The practice of criminal law at the federal level involves many of the most difficult issues practitioners face: how do you best navigate the structure of the federal court system in a way that is advantageous to your client? What is a trial exactly, and how does it work? If someone is convicted of a crime, what happens next? Are we incarcerating too many people in America? Why is there such a stark racial and socio-economic disparity between criminal defendants and other courtroom actors? This seminar introduces those issues, and provides a window into the lives of Assistant United States Attorneys, Assistant Federal Defenders, Magistrate Judges, and other federal practitioners.
LAWS 1905	Legal Analysis and Problem Solving	1 Unit	This course provides students with an opportunity to enhance their legal analysis and exam-writing skills.  The course also focuses on key components of law school success, such as maximizing the classroom experience, effective reading and briefing of case law, and exam preparation.
LAWS 1906	Professionalism: Essential Competencies and Characteristics of a Successful Lawyer	1 Unit	This course involves exploration of professional competencies and characteristics that are essential eligibility requirements for bar admission and that employers have identified as critical to success in the legal profession.  These include:  honoring commitments, integrity and trustworthiness, diligence, listening, good judgment, compliance with deadlines, and civility.  Students will evaluate how their own strengths and weaknesses fit with these competencies and characteristics, and consider how to develop them throughout law school and also communicate them to potential employers and colleagues.
LAWS 1909	Permitting Offshore Wind Energy	1 Unit	This course offers an administrative/environmental law case study, focusing on how the Icebreaker Wind Project in northeast Ohio triggered the need for permits under several federal and state laws.  The class will focus on the relevant laws and regulations, the process employed to comply with the permitting requirements, and the approvals and permits received.  The course is especially suited to those interested in the environment and renewable energy as well as those who may plan to enter fields that require an understanding of administrative law.
LAWS 1912	Bioethics and Law I	1 Unit	This course will provide an introduction to Bioethics and Law. Bioethics and Law I will focus on end-of-life care and cover topics such as informed consent, medical decision making, capacity, definitions of death, and medically-assisted dying.
LAWS 1913	Pandemic Law and Ethics	1 Unit	Introduction to basic legal and ethical issues raised during the current Covid-19 pandemic. Topics include: defining pandemics; understanding the roles of local, state and federal government; identifying the general range of public health powers; and exploring some of the ethical issues which arise in the current environment.
LAWS 1914	Courts, Public Policy, and Social Change	1 Unit	Courts, Public Policy, and Social Change will focus on the NAACP's litigation campaign against racial segregation that culminated in the landmark Supreme Court decision in Brown vs. Board of Education and also will examine the real-world impact of that decision. Among the principal topics to be considered are strategies for reforming legal doctrine, the relationship between lawyers and their clients, the use of empirical evidence in the legal process, and methods of implementing judicial rulings.
LAWS 1915	Civil Litigation Practicum I	1 Unit	This course will provide first-year students with a "hands-on" opportunity to participate in civil litigation by assisting the instructor with civil-litigation matters handled through the Milton A. Kramer Law Clinic Center. While first-year students (unlike third-year students) are not permitted to practice law under Ohio's legal-intern rule, see generally Ohio R. Gov. Bar II, they are permitted to assist by interviewing clients, conducting fact and legal research, drafting court filings, and assisting in live litigation-related appearances (depositions, trials, appellate arguments). In this course, students will observe and, to the extent permissible, engage in a wide variety of civil-litigation activities. The class sessions will focus on the applicable substantive and procedural law and related issues of case strategy, ethics, and professionalism.
LAWS 1916	Artifact Law	1 Unit	This course provides an introduction to art law by addressing the law governing who is entitled to possession of archeological and historical artifacts. It considers the relative rights of finders and other persons, the rights of persons who take possession of such artifacts by way good faith purchase or who simply have possession for a long time. The problem of international movement of artifacts and resulting conflict of laws is introduced. The impact of governmental assertions of ownership over "cultural" property is examined, as are international treaties relating to artifacts. The course complements the basic Property course, emphasizing doctrines applicable to personal property.
LAWS 1918	Housing Law Practicum	1 Unit	The Housing Law Practicum will give students an introduction to the roles that lawyers can play in their community and will combine work, readings, observations, and active participation in brief advice clinics. The classroom portion of the course will begin with an introduction to Cleveland housing patterns and racial segregation. This will be followed by classes on landlord-tenant law and an introduction to the role of lawyers in housing matters, with an emphasis on the lawyer as change agent. The Practicum portion of this course will include observing Cleveland Housing Court and will culminate with students actively participating in brief advice clinics. Prereq: Enrolled in the Juris Doctor (JD) program.
LAWS 1919	Juvenile versus Criminal Justice: A Comparative Analysis	1 Unit	The course will introduce students to juvenile law and the jurisdiction of the juvenile court by focusing on delinquency, the criminal equivalent in the juvenile justice system. It will start with the formation of juvenile courts and their underlying philosophies to provide historical context. Then the course will examine the stages of delinquency proceedings, focusing on comparing and contrasting them with criminal proceedings. The course finishes with some of the reforms affecting juvenile justice today and current trends in the law. The course makes use of secondary materials to introduce concepts and provide more global perspectives of issues. It will also help students practice foundational skills like writing case briefs and reading and interpreting statutes and rules of practice and procedure. An optional tour of the Cuyahoga County Juvenile Court and attached Detention Center will also occur, with an opportunity to meet with judges and magistrates. Prereq: Enrolled in the Juris Doctor (JD) program.
LAWS 1924	Courts, Public Policy, and Social Change II	1 Unit	Courts, Public Policy, and Social Change is designed to offer students a perspective on the social impact of law and legal institutions. The course will focus on legal challenges to discrimination based on race and sex. Among the principal topics to be considered are strategies for reforming legal doctrine, the relationship between lawyers and their clients, the use of empirical evidence in the legal process, and methods of implementing judicial rulings. Part II will examine the litigation campaign against gender discrimination.
LAWS 1925	Civil Litigation Practicum II	1 Unit	This course will provide first-year students with a "hands-on" opportunity to participate in civil litigation by assisting the instructor with civil-litigation matters handled through the Milton A. Kramer Law Clinic Center. While first-year students (unlike third-year students) are not permitted to practice law under Ohio's legal-intern rule, see generally Ohio R. Gov. Bar II, they are permitted to assist by interviewing clients, conducting fact and legal research, drafting court filings, and assisting in live litigation-related appearances (depositions, trials, appellate arguments). In this course, students will observe and, to the extent permissible, engage in a wide variety of civil-litigation activities. The class sessions will focus on the applicable substantive and procedural law and related issues of case strategy, ethics, and professionalism. Civil Litigation Practicum I is a prerequisite to Civil Litigation Practicum II. Prereq or Coreq: LAWS 1915.
LAWS 1931	Race, Law and Society	1 Unit	This year long, one credit course will allow students to explore the ways systemic racism operates in our legal, social, economic, political and cultural institutions. Students will read a seminal literary work that examines race in American society. In six meetings over the course of the academic year, the class will meet for 90 minutes to discuss the work. In addition, students will attend six one-hour presentations which examine ways in which the law has given shape to and/or perpetuated racial inequities in, for example, housing, banking, criminal justice, health care outcomes, employment, and media. These sessions will continue the themes emerging out of the assigned materials, and structured to allow students to interrogate specific institutions - their structures, benefits, faults, and reform opportunities.
LAWS 2001	Professional Responsibility	3 Units	This course deals with questions underlying the responsibilities of the lawyer, as a professional, to self, society, client, and the profession. Premises concerning the lawyer's role or roles within the context of the adversary system are examined in some detail, as is the idea of professionalism. The Model Code of Professional Responsibility and the Model Rules of Professional Conduct are analyzed as generalized statements of the aspirations and obligations of lawyers, and as applied to concrete problems. Required.
LAWS 2002	Constitutional Law I	4 Units	The constitutional system of the United States; judicial function in constitutional cases; the division of powers between the nation and the states and within the national government; the powers of the president; national and state citizenship; and constitutional limitations on the powers of the states and nation for the protection of individual liberties. Required.
LAWS 2803	Legal Writing, Leadership, Experiential Learning, Advocacy, and Professionalism 3: Advanced Skills	3 Units	This course continues to develop the legal skills introduced in LLEAP 1 and 2 courses.  Students will continue their study of legal research, analysis, and advocacy in this advanced writing course.  Two sections will be offered each semester providing students with the choice of focusing on Litigation or Transactional work.  Students will engage in simulated counseling with clients such as, negotiations, case management conferences, and firm meetings.  In the Transactional section, students will work through an entire transaction starting with a letter of intent, continuing on to contract drafting and due diligence, and ending with the closing. In the Litigation section, students will be exposed to the entire spectrum of litigating a case, including pleadings, discovery, dispositive motions, pretrial filings, trial, and appeal.
LAWS 3501	Introduction to Financial Integrity	4 Units	This course will introduce students to laws, policies, and practices in combatting money laundering, terrorism financing, and evasion of targeted sanctions.  It focuses on the Financial Action Task Force's 40 Recommendations and Methodologies for Assessing Compliance, and cites examples of compliance assessments from jurisdictions from around the globe. Prereq: Students enrolled in MA Financial Integrity program.
LAWS 3502	Preventive Measures	4 Units	This course examines in detail measures that banks and other financial institutions are required to implement as financial integrity preventive measures. Focuses on risk assessment, customer on boarding and acceptance, record keeping, customer activity monitoring, suspicious activity report preparation, internal controls, and the supervisory process. Risk assessment techniques will be emphasized. Also, the course reviews the FATF preventive measures standards and methods of compliance assessments. A sampling of key national laws and regulations, including those of the United States, is included.
LAWS 3503	Operational & Law Enforcement	4 Units	This course will examine the operations of national financial intelligence units in analyzing suspicious activity reports and other data and information and in creating actionable intelligence from that information. It will then review the investigation and prosecution of both criminal and civil prosecution of financial integrity crimes. The course will also review the FATF operational and law enforcement standards and methods of compliance assessments. A sampling of key national laws and regulations, including those of the United States, will be included. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Executive Master of Arts-Financial Integrity program.
LAWS 3504	International Cooperation in Civil and Criminal Matters	4 Units	This course will examine in detail how financial intelligence units, investigators, prosecutors, and investigative judges/magistrates cooperate with officials of other jurisdictions in identifying possible financial integrity crimes, investigating and prosecuting those cases, and recovering assets that are candidates for freezing or confiscation. The course will also review the FATF standards for cooperation in civil and criminal matters and methods of compliance assessments, relevant U.N. conventions, model laws and regulations, and a sampling of key national laws and regulations, including those of the United States. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Executive Master of Arts-Financial Integrity program.
LAWS 3505	Building and Implementing an Effective Preventive Measures Compliance Program	4 Units	The course will examine specific problems that arise in building an effective preventive measures program. In addition to an in-depth examination of selected problems in designing and implementing preventive measures, the course will cover audits, inspections, on-site examinations, and sanctions. It will rely primarily on the presentation and discussion of case studies in each critical area of an effective compliance program, with a focus on the banking sector. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Executive Master of Arts-Financial Integrity program.
LAWS 3506	Building and Prosecuting Criminal and Civil Financial Integrity Cases	4 Units	The course will examine specific problems that arise in building and prosecuting financial integrity cases. In addition to an in-depth examination of selected problems in building and prosecuting cases, we will cover problems in asset tracing and recovery, and will rely primarily on the presentation and discussion of case studies in each critical area of investigation and prosecution. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Executive Master of Arts-Financial Integrity program.
LAWS 3551	Customer Acceptance & Transaction Monitoring Systems	2 Units	This course will consider the use of automated customer acceptance and transaction monitoring systems, as well as follow-up investigations by internal FIUs. It will examine key issues in data base formation, including web-based text recognition and analysis, link analysis, and different forms of statistical discriminant and regression analysis, and forms of data presentation. The course will make use of case studies and will examine current vendor products. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Executive Master of Arts-Financial Integrity program.
LAWS 3554	Global Justice: Anti-money laundering and financing of terrorism	2 Units	The course will focus on practical and theoretical issues of global justice as they pertain to anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism. What are our obligations to international justice? How do they influence financial integrity law law? The course will consider the normative basis of jurisprudence, comparing legal positivism to natural law theory. Next, the course will look at theories of global justice suitable to answer normative questions on what law should aim at. The remainder of the course will consider practical issues that come into play with financial integrity law, such as corruption, poverty, distributive justice, human rights, violence, and war. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Executive Master of Arts-Financial Integrity program.
LAWS 3555	Blockchain and Artificial Intelligence in Compliance	2 Units	This course will cover the rise of technology use in compliance and risk disciplines impacting financial crimes industry. The focus will be on use of artificial intelligence and introduction of new products such as cryptocurrency, initial coin offerings and crypto asset backed offerings lend to increase complexity in the role of compliance when dealing with products and technology without an established roadmap. Content and discussions will examine the changing demands on compliance officers and growing reliance of technology in operational execution of the AML/CFT program. It will review the disparate guidance globally which make the operational implementation and compliance advisory challenging in a fast-paced financial services industry. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Executive Master of Arts-Financial Integrity program.
LAWS 4101	International Law	3 Units	An introduction to basic comparative, transnational, and international law disciplines.  Using areas of substantive and procedural law familiar to first-year students, the course examines issues arising from cross-national activity.  Students are exposed to choice of law, comparative law, international law, and international institutions.
LAWS 4201	Health Law	3 Units	This course provides a broad survey of the fundamental legal issues surrounding the delivery of health care in the United States.  It is an introduction to the complex and wide-ranging field of health law.  Topics include: health insurance; the regulation of medical professionals and institutions; the clinician-patient relationship; liability of health care professionals and institutions; discrimination in health care; and professional relationships in health care.  Students will learn to identify and analyze major legal issues in health care contexts and to understand the interplay among cost, quality, and access to care.
LAWS 4300	Intellectual Property Survey	3 Units	This course is designed to provide students with an overview of several areas of law traditionally associated with intellectual property or IP, including copyright law, which pertains to the protection of literary, musical, and artistic creations and has issues replete with First Amendment implications; patent law and trade secret law, which focus on the protection of technological works ranging from chemical formulae, to software, to biotechnology; and trademark law, which relates to the goodwill associated with corporate identity and product recognition. We will also devote time to the study of the philosophy and economics of intellectual property keeping in mind, throughout the course, the need to strike an optimal balance between incentives to create and commercialize intellectual creations on the one hand and public access to these creations on the other hand.
LAWS 4301	Copyright Law	3 Units	Copyright law is the in-depth study of the legal doctrine and policy relating to the protection of one's artistic, literary, musical, and computer-related expression. We will focus primarily on the 1976 Copyright Act and amendments thereto, such as the Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998.
LAWS 4302	Patent Law	2 - 3 Units	Basic concepts of patent law as property considered primarily in its substantive aspects, including the relationship to other forms of protection and intellectual property, infringement, and statutory requirements for patents.
LAWS 4303	Trademark Law	3 Units	Trademark Law is the study of how commercial entities use words and designs to identify the source their products and services in the minds of consumers and competitors.  This course focuses on domestic and international trademark acquisition, retention, transfer, registration, and infringement.  In addition to the common law of trademarks and unfair competition, much of this course will be devoted to studying the statutory scheme of federal trademark law.
LAWS 4311	Patent Preparation and Prosecution 1	3 Units	Patent preparation, drafting, and filing of a patent application are the fundamental aspects of patent practice. Students will learn how to conduct a client-inventor interview, what questions to ask the client-inventor and what information is most important to obtain prior to commencing the patent drafting process. Technical aspects of patentability searching will also be explored.  In addition, the student will learn the various parts of the patent application and best practices associated with drafting each part. Before the drafting takes place, the class will cover relevant case law.  Also, nonlegal, practical aspects such as organization, various grammatical concerns, and other concepts related to patent drafting will be covered.  Ultimately, students will take the information provided in the class and draft an actual patent application based upon a simple hypothetical invention. Emphasis will be placed on specification drafting and claim drafting, and how to claim around prior art. Prereq or coreq: LAWS 4302.
LAWS 4312	Patent Preparation and Prosecution 2	2 Units	The course builds on Patent Preparation and Prosecution 1 (LAWS 4311) and will focus on aspects of patent prosecution post-filing. In particular, students will learn how to respond to an Office Action rejecting the patent application as is typically encountered during the practice before the US Patent and Trademark Office. The student's response will take the form of an Amendment that will reflect changes made to the claims and arguments relating to patentability. The course will also cover the appeals process. Prereq: LAWS 4311.
LAWS 4315	Patent Agent Lab	3 Units	The patent claim is the most important part of the patent application, because it is the claim that represents the metes and bounds of inventor's property right.  This Lab is devoted to drafting claims, understanding the different types of claims, and how claims differ depending on the nature of the technology.
LAWS 4401	Business Associations	4 Units	This course is an introduction to the law of business associations, including general and limited partnerships, limited liability companies, and corporations. The functions and relationships of enterprise participants, primarily promoters, equity owners, creditors, and managers are investigated.  The course covers pre-organizational problems and then canvasses the roles of ownership and management, with emphasis on the special duties (fiduciary and other) imposed on certain participants in publicly and closely-held entities.  The regulation of securities fraud, proxy voting and solicitations, and the issuance of securities under the federal securities laws is explored.  Fundamental concepts of business financing, including valuation of the concern and claim structure, are investigated.  Organic changes, including dissolutions, mergers, and tender offers, are discussed.
LAWS 4402	Nonprofit Organizations Law	2 Units	Explores the rationales for the existence of the nonprofit sector and the allocation of certain functions to it. The focus is on the legal framework for the structure and operation of nonprofit organizations under state nonprofit corporation statutes and the policy and practice of preferred tax treatment for selected organizations and gifts to them under the Internal Revenue Code.
LAWS 4404	Sales	3 Units	One of the basic courses in commercial law. It serves equally as an introduction to the general organization, structure, and appropriate application of the Uniform Commercial Code. Primarily we study the law of Sale of Goods under Article 2 of the U.C.C.  Necessarily this includes a study of products liability law, which is explored under both sales warranty and strict tort liability theories. The interrelationship between these competing theories of products liability law are also investigated. Other specific topics studied are the legal rules applicable to 1) the formation of sale contract, including the battle of the forms, statute of frauds, and parol evidence rule, 2) performance of and excuse of performance from the sales contract, 3) title warranties and title transfers, and 4) remedies for breach of the sales contract. Students may not take both LAWS 381 and LAWS 266 (Sales and Secured Financing).
LAWS 4405	Federal Income Tax	3 - 4 Units	An introductory course in federal income taxation of the individual taxpayer, including a consideration of the nature of income, specific statutory exclusions, business and nonbusiness deductions, the treatment of capital gains and losses, and elementary tax accounting.
LAWS 4406	Franchise Law	1 Unit	The course will provide an overview of federal and state regulation of franchise sales and will touch on other legal issues (types of business entities, trademark law) encountered when a business proposes to sell franchises.  We will address sample franchise agreement clauses, requirements for completing the mandatory franchise disclosure document, and typical franchise related litigation scenarios.
LAWS 4561	Governance, Risk Management, and Compliance	3 Units	This course deals with the institutional dynamics that allow compliance officers to interact with business owners and regulators in order to properly risk-manage compliance requirements while creating and enforcing a code of conduct that champions an ethical corporate culture. The students are introduced to the Code of Ethics and corporate governance, including the role of the board of directors and executives in managing firms and overseeing risk management and regulatory compliance. The course covers the detection and handling of potential compliance lapses, including the conduct of investigations and the role of whistleblowers and attorney advisors. Students will explore the broader compliance functions of social responsibility, sustainability, and human rights. This course will be useful as a foundation for any student studying any highly regulated field where risk management is required, such as in the health care or finance settings.
LAWS 4570	Compliance & Risk Management Skills: Planning, Auditing, Investigating, and Reporting	3 Units	This course covers the basic concepts of regulatory compliance and risk management and how to: identify the compliance obligations of an enterprise; assess the legal risks associated with these obligations; build a compliance and ethics program that effectively mitigates these risks; roll out an effective program; develop appropriate audit procedures to analyze program effectiveness; correct and improve organizational operations by follow-up monitoring, process change, and education; and lead a response to a regulatory audit or investigation, all while generating value through compliance and ethics. Prereq: LAWS 4561.
LAWS 4711	Technology in Law Practice	1 Unit	One of the biggest hurdles for lawyers seeking to adapt to--and adopt--technology affecting their practices is to sort through questions about how that technology relates to traditional ethics rules. In 2009 the ABA Commission on Ethics 20/20 was created to review the impact of technology and globalization on the ABA Model Rules of Professional Conduct. By the time it completed its work in 2013, the commission had developed a number of recommendations, the most significant was the implications of the need to keep up with the changing technology environment as set forth in Model Rule 1.1, which requires a lawyer to provide competent representation to a client. This one credit course (held in an intensive one-week meeting format) will provide law students with the knowledge and practice skills needed to comply with the added language to the comments to Rule 1.1, stating that competence encompasses knowledge about "the benefits and risks associated with relevant technology."
LAWS 4714	Essential Legal Theory	3 Units	This course is designed to explore the most fundamental legal concepts. The primary focus is on the characteristics of rules, what rules must be like and how they can 'go wrong'. Other legal norms, such as standards, will also will explored, and the question will be posed: when ought the law to use rules, and when standards? The centrality of such norms to the enterprise we call law will be examined, as well as the question of whether such norms are binding upon the citizen. We consider the nature of justice and how it relates to law, as well as how legal entitlements are structured in terms of rights and privileges. We also examine how these ideas shed light on the nature of legal reasoning. Along the way, we will discuss one of the most common problems generated by misunderstanding the nature of rules and standards: the many confusions surrounding the notion of a stereotype. We pose the question: when and why is decision-making by use of a stereotype improper?  In this context, we will examine a number of issues of age, gender, and racial discrimination, among others.
LAWS 4806	Administrative Law	3 Units	This course examines the legal and institutional framework within which agencies administer regulatory statutes, with emphasis on procedural and constitutional issues. Major themes include limiting arbitrary action, controlling agency discretion, and promoting governmental accountability. Examples and problems are drawn from a wide range of substantive areas, including business, communications, consumer protection, education, environmental, health and safety, intellectual property, labor and employment law, and real estate law.
LAWS 4807	Criminal Procedure I	3 Units	The investigatory stage of the criminal process. Constitutional limitations on searches and seizures, interrogation practices, and pretrial identification procedures are examined. In addition, the exclusionary rule, the principal method for enforcing Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Amendment rights, is considered.
LAWS 4808	Evidence	4 Units	A comprehensive course in the law of evidence as applied in civil and criminal cases. Subjects include relevance, hearsay, judicial notice, privileges, examination of witnesses, expert and lay opinion testimony, and real, demonstrative, and scientific evidence. This course deals with both the practical applications and theoretical underpinnings of the Federal Rules of Evidence and common law precedents. Students may not take both LAWS 207 and LAWS 212.
LAWS 4809	Wills, Trusts, and Future Interests	3 - 4 Units	A survey of the law of intestate and testate succession, will substitutes, private and charitable trusts, fiduciary administration, and future interests (including the Rule Against Perpetuities).
LAWS 4810	Entering the Profession	2 Units	This course provides an introduction to the testing formats and required skills common to bar exams in United States jurisdictions, including the Multistate Bar Exam (MBE, multiple-choice format); the Multistate Performance Test (MPT, task-oriented essay); and essay questions in various substantive areas (which generally incorporate some state-specific content).  Substantive content will be presented to provide raw material for practice testing.  Students will earn the course credit by attending at least 80% of class sessions and completing 100% of written assignments with at least 65% success rate.  Rewrites and retests will be allowed on request.  The course does not comprise complete preparation for any bar exam.  Rather, it provides familiarity, study strategies, and test-taking instruction along with limited substantive content.
LAWS 4811	Business of Law Practice	2 - 3 Units	This class will expose each student to the introductory realities of the business of the practice of law with an expectation of enabling each student to develop a sole practitioner law practice upon graduation.  This class will define the necessary elements for consideration on forming a sole practitioner law practice, then move to how to optimize implementing you law practice business, and finally how to profit from your law practice business while best serving your client.  This class will offer an introduction to  practical, real life advice and guidance to create, open, and successfully run a sole practitioner law practice. Class will proceed via lecture, discussion, and be highly interactive, with a final project. At the conclusion of this class you will develop an actual business plan that you will then use to implement your successful sole practitioner law practice.
LAWS 4820	Patent Bar Review	4 Units	Passing the patent bar is a requirement for practicing before the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office (USPTO).  This course will introduce students to 35 U.S.C. (the United States "patent laws") and 37 C.F.R. (Code of Federal Regulations encompassing the patent rules), followed by an in-depth study of the M.P.E.P. (Manual of Patent Examining Procedure), which is the Patent Office's rule book that covers all the patent laws and rules as interpreted by the USPTO. In addition, the course will cover the particulars of the patent bar exam, including questions from prior exams; essential materials the students need to master to pass the exam, and provide students with several opportunities to hone their bar taking skills. Prereq: LAWS 4302 and LAWS 4311 and enrolled in the Master of Patent Practice program.
LAWS 4901	Foreign Graduate Seminar	2 Units	This seminar is the required introductory course for foreign students enrolled in the Graduate Program in U.S. Legal Studies. It begins with a series of lectures introducing students to American legal education; American government, courts, and culture; various common law subjects; and professional responsibility. Throughout the year seminar sessions are held with legal practitioners from law firms and corporations in the Cleveland area who are involved in an international practice. Limited to the foreign LL.M. students.
LAWS 4903	U.S. Contract Law	3 Units	The subject matter and coverage of this course is approximately the same as the subject matter and coverage of first-year Contracts (LAWS 1101) as abbreviated and modified to reflect that it (a) is limited to foreign students who are candidates for the LL.M. in U.S. Legal Studies and (b) consists of 3 (not 5) credit hours.
LAWS 4904	Doing Business in the United States	3 Units	The course is designed to introduce foreign students to many areas of U.S. domestic law through consideration of a transnational business transaction.  Examples of areas of law covered: restrictions on foreign investment, regulatory agencies, banking and finance, importing and exporting, business entities, litigation and alternative dispute resolution, labor relations, immigration law, taxation.  Limited to candidates for the LL.M. in the U.S. Legal Studies.
LAWS 4910	Language and Law	5 Units	This course introduces students to the study of law in the U.S. and provides students with a practical introduction to U.S. legal writing and analysis.  The class emphasizes reading, analysis, research, writing, and comprehension skills necessary for students to participate in legal discourse in a law school setting.  The class allows international students and professionals to develop language skills in a law-related context. No credit is awarded toward the degree requirements, but completion of this course may a condition of admission to the law school's foreign graduate programs.
LAWS 4911	SJD Seminar	0 - 2 Units	This year-long seminar is required of all SJD program students.  The purpose of the class is to improve the academic writing skills of SJD students, introduce students to thesis writing, and to improve the English writing skills of those students whose native language is not English.
LAWS 4912	U.S. Legal Research, Writing, and Analysis	2 Units	This is a required course for students in any of the Foreign Graduate LL.M. programs.  The course is designed to teach English compositional skills and grammar for legal studies.  With an English-as-a-second-language focus, this course will seek to teach students the various steps of the writing process, English grammar, and certain aspects of legal composition.  The main goal of this course is to enable students to write clearly and correctly within U.S. legal studies and the U.S. legal work place.
LAWS 4922	U.S. Legal Scholarly Writing	1 Unit	This is the second of a two-course sequence for students in the Foreign Graduate LL.M. programs.  This course focuses on advanced writing schools, with special attention to legal research skills.  The course is required for students seeking a degree in the specialty LL.M. programs, and is an elective for other LL.M. students.
LAWS 4930	Intensive English Language Study	0 Unit	The course is designed for LL.M. students who have already studied English and are below (but close to)  the proficiency level for full-time LL.M. studies. The course seeks student proficiency in spoken and written English. The course provides intensive English speaking and writing course designed specifically for foreign graduate legal studies students needing English language skills to succeed in their legal studies.
LAWS 5110	Contemporary Issues in International and Comparative Law	1 Unit	The objectives of the course will revolve around initiating students to the basic concepts and principles of comparative law reasoning and helping students make sense of the increasing dialogue between jurisdictions practicing constitutionalism in a global context with a focus on human rights issues. The coverage of the proposed course will select from the following themes depending on student interest and availability of materials: (a) Freedom of religion, secularism and culture; (b) Freedom of expression and hate propaganda; (c) Freedom of expression and sexual representation; (d) Equality and same sex unions; (e) Assisted suicide; (f) Death penalty; (g) Implementation of human rights in federal or quasi-federal politics; (h) Socio-economic rights; and/or (i) Cultural rights.
LAWS 5111	Admiralty Law	2 Units	The general principles of admiralty law including jurisdiction, practice, maritime liens, collisions, salvage, limitation of liability, and the rights of injured maritime workers.
LAWS 5113	Counterterrorism Law	3 Units	This course will take an in-depth look at counter-terrorism in the United States, Israel, and other countries.  The course will examine the competing conceptions and definitions of terrorism at the national and international level and the institutions and processes designed to execute the "war on terrorism."  This will include study of the balance between security and liberty policies in the U.S. Patriot Act, the use of military tribunals or civil courts, the use of assassination or targeted killings, and the emerging law on enemy combatants and their detention, and the arguable need for new self-defense doctrines at the global level.
LAWS 5115	International Arbitration	2 Units	An advanced course covering the current status of arbitration as a dispute settlement mechanism in international affairs. This course will cover the use of arbitration as a means of resolving international disputes: a) between private parties; b) between private and governmental parties; and c) between governments.  It will cover possible forums and rules of arbitral dispute resolution and the problems of the enforcement of foreign arbitral awards. Special aspects of dispute resolution in certain geographical and subject areas will be covered as will be the problem of sovereign immunity. Disputes arising from multinational business transactions will be focused on as will be maritime, environmental, and border disputes.
LAWS 5116	International Human Rights	3 Units	This course will cover a variety of issues in the area of international human rights. Issues covered will include the law of treaties and treaty interpretation; international organizations' and non-governmental organizations' roles in protecting human rights; the rights of women and minorities; critiques of the idea of "universal" human rights; and the Alien Tort Claims Act.  In addition to covering the procedure and substance of the international system for protection of human rights, we will also discuss human rights under various domestic legal systems from a comparative perspective.
LAWS 5118	International Law Research Lab	3 Units	Students in this unusual course undertake  legal research projects designed at the request of various international law enforcement organizations. Recent clients include the International Criminal Court, the UN-affiliated tribunals in Cambodia and Sierra Leone, Interpol, U.S. Military Commissions, and the U.S.Coast Guard, among others.  Course sessions explore the development and practice of international criminal law as well as developing jurisprudence relevant to the current students' projects. Substantial time is devoted to in-class discussion of target issues, writing workshops, and individual presentation of findings.  Completed projects are forwarded  to the requesting clients and posted in the school's international war crimes portal.  Grades are based on the quality of students' participation and the final written product.
LAWS 5120	International Business Transactions	3 Units	This course examines various types of international business activities from a transactional perspective. It focuses on international sales, international payments, and international licensing transactions and examines the different legal systems (state, federal, international) that may impact on these transactions. It also considers commercial aspects of the interpretation of cross-border contracts, dispute resolution concerning cross-border contracts, and the role of lawyers. Some basic issues relating to private international law/conflicts of law are also addressed. There is also some introductory coverage of international electronic commerce transactions and related legal issues.
LAWS 5121	International Criminal Law and Procedure	3 Units	This course surveys selected issues and current problems involving the criminal aspects of international law and the international aspects of criminal law. The course begins with an introduction to the origins and purposes of international criminal law. We will then explore the contours of the duty to prosecute those who commit international crimes. Next, we will focus on application of domestic and international law to the question of jurisdiction over international criminal activities. This is followed by three units examining substantive international criminal law as contained in multilateral treaties concerning terrorism, war crimes and crimes against humanity. Next, we will explore the procedural aspects of international cooperation in criminal matters, with particular attention to extradition and problems associated with obtaining evidence from abroad. We will also analyze the reach of U.S. constitutional protections to U.S. investigative and law enforcement activities overseas. Finally, we will study the new Yugoslavia and Rwanda War Crimes Tribunals and the permanent International Criminal Court. The class will be seminar-format, with short writing assignments, weekly simulations, and role-play exercises designed to bring the materials to life. There will be no final exam.
LAWS 5122	Transnational Litigation	2 Units	This seminar focuses on the litigation of transnational disputes in domestic courts.  Topics include jurisdiction, international service of process procedures for obtaining evidence internationally, and the international enforcement of judgments.  Students will complete a substantial research paper and will present the results of their research to the class.
LAWS 5123	Trade Law	3 Units	The public international and United States law regulating international trade.  (The private law of international trade and investment is dealt with in International Business Transactions, LAWS 354.) It includes the economic theory of international trade (although no exposure to a course in economics in secondary or undergraduate education is necessary) as well as a legal examination of issues regulating global and regional (e.g., the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement, EEC) international trade.  Primary emphasis is on the General Agreement of Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the World Trade Organization (WTO) as well as such United States legislation implementing the GATT as antidumping and countervailing duties legislation and escape clause relief.  The roles of trade and aid are also explored, as well as U.S. legislation affecting the transfer of resources to less developed countries.
LAWS 5124	Islamic Law	2 Units	This course will cover major aspects of the Islamic Law. It will provide students with a better understanding of Islam and its adherents. Many topics related to Islam and its basic beliefs, including some contemporary issues, will be covered in this course.
LAWS 5126	International Development Law	2 Units	This course gives students an introduction to a basic analytical framework of international development law. We will specifically examine the role of global finance in the process of economic development, and highlight recent trends within emerging capital markets.  Following this introduction, we will critically examine social impact investing as a new innovative approach to international development that specifically addresses Environmental Social and Corporate Governance (ESG) issues.
LAWS 5128	Holocaust and the Law	2 Units	Students will study the role of law before, during, and after the Holocaust.  The course begins by examining the legal and political landscape in which the German Weimar Republic transformed into a dictatorship, and the role of law, lawyers, judges, and the courts in the transition and under the Nazi Regime.  Students will also study the myriad of legal issues that arose after the Holocaust, including the Nuremberg trials; claims for restitution, slave wages, insurance proceeds, and artwork; Holocaust denial; immigration policy; and the how the Holocaust and its aftermath shapes the political and legal response to genocide today.
LAWS 5129	Critical Race Theory	2 Units	This course will explore the foundations and central tenets of Critical Race Theory (CRT), from its origins in Critical Legal Studies to current applications, debates, and evolutions. It will also bring in CRT "offshoots" such as TribalCrit, LatCrit, APACrit, QueerCrit, DisCrit and Critical Race Feminism. CRT posits that racism is endemic to society, but that we must also remain committed to social justice, and the intersection of theory and practice in our extant institutions. This seminar asks how future leaders might navigate the tensions between theory and practice, and use CRT to provide a toolkit for navigating scholarship and social reform in the realms of race and racism?  CRT originates in critiques of anti-discrimination law and in reactions to Critical Legal Studies. Students will learn of those origins, explore established debates within CRT, and examine contemporary directions within the genre. This seminar will presume familiarity with basic constitutional law, but the readings will, in the main, draw from legal literature rather than case law. Prereq: LAWS 2002.
LAWS 5135	War and Morality	3 Units	The aim of this course is to explore a wide range of ethical issues relating to the decision to take a nation to war, how wars are conducted, and efforts to establish order in the wake of a conflict.  Topics include the Just War tradition, pacifism, humanitarian intervention, moral repair and the establishment of a just peace, conduct of war, warrior codes, warrior transitions, and civil-military relations.  We will be examining the ethics of war from the perspectives of both states and individuals.  War is a crucible that strips those caught up in its horrors down to their fundamental selves inspiring acts of both inhuman depravity and seemingly superhuman nobility.  This course is presented in a seminar format with lively discussions centering on contemporary readings in military ethics from texts and journals.   Offered as PHIL 317, PHIL 417, and LAWS 5135.
LAWS 5136	International Humanitarian Law	1 Unit	This course is designed to prepare the student members of the Jean Pictet Competition team, but is open to all students with an interest in international humanitarian law. The course will be taught in two all-day Friday-Saturday sessions in January and February by international humanitarian law expert Gregory Noone, who is currently a fellow at the U.S. Institute of Peace and was previously Head of the Foreign Military Rights Affairs Branch of the Office of the Judge Advocate General at the Pentagon. Using case studies as well as simulations and role-playing exercises, the course will address the field of international humanitarian law as a whole, including the law of armed conflict, international criminal law, international human rights law, and the role of international organizations such as the ICRC and U.N. The objective of the course is to convey the reality of international law. Like humanitarian law itself, the course will not deal solely with legal disputes or judicial matters, but with practice and real life situations. The course grade will be based on a paper that will not satisfy the Writing Requirement.
LAWS 5138	Chinese Business Law	3 Units	This course will introduce students to Chinese business law systems in the context of globalization and from the perspective of comparative law.  We will examine the various legal aspects of "doing business in China" through discussing the Chinese corporate law, contract law, foreign direct investment law, and other relevant systems.   Course objectives are for students to gain understanding of both the legal theories and practices in the field of Chinese business law, be able to identify and analyze the issues arising from the US businesses invested in China and/or the Chinese-US joint ventures, and be able to provide solutions to solve these issues.
LAWS 5140	Vis International Commercial Arbitration Practicum	3 Units	This course introduces students to the basics of international commercial arbitration ('CA').  They will learn both substantive law (such as how to use the CISG, UNCITRAL rules) and legal skills associated with the practice of ICA.  The main assignments for the class will include a brief for either the claimant or respondent in a commercial arbitration, and an oral argument on behalf of the client.  Course is limited to students in the Joint LLM Degree in International Commercial Law & Dispute Resolution. Prereq: Limited to students in the LLM program only.
LAWS 5172	Transnational Litigation Topics	2 Units	This course provides additional credits for students who are interested in doing additional research and writing in a specific area of transnational litigation.  With the permission of the Instructor, this work may satisfy the JD Writing Requirement. Coreq: LAWS 5122.
LAWS 5203	Food, Drug, and Biotech Law	2 Units	This course examines the federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. It will entail a detailed look at the law, policy statements, and literature related to approving new drugs and devices. The course covers such topics as human subjects research; product labeling and testing; OTC vs. prescription status; compassionate use exceptions; control of biotechnology techniques; differences between food, drugs and devices; and FDA enforcement. We will also explore how law and the legal system anticipate and also respond to changes in technology in ways that may enhance or inhibit the development of new technologies and new applications of old technologies. Attendance at classes is mandatory. Grade is based on final exam.
LAWS 5204	Genetics and Law	3 Units	The current federal Human Genome Project is attempting to understand the health and behavioral implications of the 50,000 to 100,000 genes in the human body.  Genetic tests are being offered to let people know if they are at risk of having a child with a genetic defect or if they will later in life suffer from cancer or other disease.  Genetic predispositions are also being investigated for certain behaviors such as gay sexual preference, intelligence, and anti-social behavior.  This course will cover the tort law, family law, constitutional law, criminal law, employment law, and insurance implications of developments in genetics.
LAWS 5205	Public Health Law	2 Units	This course surveys a range of issues in public health law including contagious diseases, health surveillance and privacy, tobacco, controlled substances, obesity, firearms, emergency preparedness and bioterrorism.  It is designed to introduce students studying law or public health to the basic constitutional principles involved in public health law; the scope of local, state and federal authority to regulate; and the variety of ethical issues that arise.
LAWS 5213	Psychiatry and Law	2 Units	This course focuses on the interaction between mental health and the legal system. Topics include: basic psychiatry for attorneys, overview of psychiatric symptoms and disorders, insanity defense, competence as a concept, competence to stand trial, other criminal competencies, insanity acquittee release, diminished capacity/guilty but mentally ill defenses, battered women syndrome defense, duress defense, informed consent, right to treatment, right to refuse treatment, duty to protect, drug courts, therapeutic jurisprudence, testamentary capacity/undue influence, defendant and prisoner rights, juvenile justice, civil commitment, infanticide, family murder and mental illness, child abuse evaluations, suicide and violence risk assessment, stalking, psychiatric disability and emotional damages, brief history of psychiatry, psychiatrist malpractice, and psychiatry and the death penalty. This course is taught by a forensic psychiatrist and is open for law, medical, and bioethics students, and practicing mental health professionals.
LAWS 5215	Health Care and Human Rights	2 Units	This course combines two areas of law of vital importance.  Courts, legislatures, and administrative agencies around the world often grapple with health law questions in light of new medical technologies, public health crises, and enduring questions regarding treatment choices.  At the same time, in a world that is both globalized and plagued by catastrophes such as ethnic cleansing and natural disasters, issues of human rights are at the forefront of public debate. The intersection of health care and human rights, therefore, constitutes a worthy and fascinating area of study. Topics to be covered will include: 1) an overview of relevant human rights doctrines; 2) the status of the right to health care in different countries; 3) biomedical research involving human subjects; 4) disability rights; 5) privacy and confidentiality issues in medicine; 6) organ transplantation; 7) medical aid in dying; 8) public health emergencies; 9) climate change; 10) gun rights and gun control.
LAWS 5218	Health Care Organizations, Finance, and Regulation	3 Units	This course will introduce students to legal issues associated with the financing of health care (both public and private payment systems), as well as the forms and structures of modern health care organizations, including the creation and regulation of tax-exempt organizations and how the antitrust laws impact the structure and conduct of health care providers.  The course will also cover the federal and state laws that impose criminal and civil penalties on health care providers for a variety of activities. Coverage will include the five main Federal fraud and abuse laws: the False Claims Act, the Anti-Kickback Statute, the Stark Law, the Exclusion Statute, and the Civil Monetary Penalties Law, as well as an introduction to the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. Discussions will include how health care businesses can comply with these laws in their relationships with payers (e.g., the Medicare and Medicaid programs), vendors (e.g., drug, biologic, and medical device companies), and fellow providers (e.g., hospitals, nursing homes, and physician colleagues). These areas will be reviewed both from the perspective of compliance and transactional issues. The course will also cover labor and employment issues and management of patient safety issues.
LAWS 5220	Health Care Controversies	2 Units	In this experiential 2-credit course, students are confronted with a series of current, controversial, real-world problems in health law and policy, such as how to allocate transplant organs; how to ration expensive health care services; "reforming" the medical malpractice system; how the employment of physicians by hospitals alters the legal nature of the patient-physician relationship; legal issues associated with accountable care organizations under the Affordable Care Act; etc. To approximate real-world experience in the practice of health law, students are teamed with other students on a rotating basis and required to produce a team response and present and defend it in class. For each problem, the student also is required to write a short memo (approximately 5 pages) describing their own personal solution or response. Six memos are due over the course of the semester, approximately one every two weeks. The students' grade will be based on the grades they receive on the memos. Students from other health professional schools may enroll in the course and will be included in the teams. In addition to the law instructor there will be an outside medical or policy expert assisting with each problem.
LAWS 5224	Hospital Risk Management	1 Unit	Through the use of hypotheticals and examples the following topics will be covered from the perspective of an experienced risk management professional:  what is health care risk management; incident reporting and investigation; legal and regulatory risks including NPDB, SMDA, Sentinel events, comparison of state laws involving medical malpractice; interface of risk management with other departments in the institution; claims and litigation management; risk financing; claims resolution; on call advice; education of all levels of health care professionals.
LAWS 5225	Research Ethics and Regulation	1 - 2 Units	This course is designed to introduce students to the ethical, policy, and legal issues raised by research involving human subjects.  It is intended for law students, post-doctoral trainees in health-related disciplines and other students in relevant fields.  Topics include (among others): regulation and monitoring of research; research in third-world nations; research with special populations; stem cell and genetic research; research to combat bioterrorism; scientific misconduct; conflicts of interest; commercialization and intellectual property; and the use of deception and placebos.  Course will meet once per week for 2 hours throughout the semester.  Grades will be given based on class participation and a series of group projects and individual short writing assignments. Offered as BETH 503, CRSP 603 and LAWS 5225.
LAWS 5226	Public Health Law Lab	3 Units	This Lab will involve students in an integrated experience of academic research and public service. Weekly sessions will provide a general background in public health law. Students will work on semester-long research projects for a State/Local Health Department or for the Network for Public Health Law, supervised by faculty at the School of Law.  Topics may include environmental health regulations, emergency preparedness, cross-border public health, food safety, health information data sharing, injury prevention, maternal/child health, public health statutes and regulations, vaccination requirements, obesity prevention, and tobacco control. Grade will be based on collaborative work and written projects.
LAWS 5228	Using Technology to Increase Access to Justice	2 Units	In this course, students will 1) increase their substantive and practical knowledge of the access to justice issues facing low-income individuals and the Ohio rules on the unauthorized practice of law; and, 2) take part in a user-centered legal design process to add new ChatBot and LiveChat functionality to Ohio's statewide legal help portal, www.OhioLegalHelp.org.
LAWS 5229	Information Privacy Law	1 Unit	Data is everywhere today, and is being used by a broader range of entities for a broader range of purposes every day.  Lawyers for virtually every industry (and around the world) must understand the key principles surrounding the use and disclosure of personal data when providing virtually all aspects of legal advice to their clients, including overall compliance, business strategy, mergers and acquisitions, litigation and the full range of specific privacy and data security laws and regulations. This law applies to the biggest companies in the world, as well as an incredible array of start-up and technology companies.  This course will explore the primary legal and policy principles surrounding the use and disclosure of personal data, covering the key privacy and security laws, regulations and principles that govern how industry operates today in the United States and around the world.  	Day 1 will focus on general principles related to privacy and data security.  We will explore the foundations of privacy law, focusing on Fair Information Privacy Principles.  We will then proceed to the most recent history of privacy and security law in the United States, covering the key laws by industry sector (health care, financial services), specific practice (telemarketing, data from children), and the evolving law of data security.  We will briefly review how these principles apply internationally as well.  Then, we will explore emerging areas for privacy and information security, including new enforcement principles, application of these principles to vendor relationships, issues related to security breaches and breach notification and key litigation issues. 	Day 2 will focus on the health care industry and the specific laws, regulations and principles addressing the privacy and security of health care information.  This day will emphasize the primary privacy and information security principles set out in the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act ("HIPAA") as a baseline framework, and will explore how these rules apply in theory and in practice.  We also will explore emerging areas for privacy and information security, including enforcement activities, other privacy and security laws impacting health care data beyond HIPAA, the law of health care research and related principles involving the "de-identification" of personal data, and the emergence of "non-HIPAA" data as a new challenge to the privacy and data security regulatory structure.  	Class sessions will consist of a combination of lecture, discussion, hypotheticals, and real-life problems drawn from the instructor's experience in order to keep the class engaged. The goal for both days is to understand the key principles of the developing law in this area, but also to teach what a lawyer actually does on these issues and the need to combine legal knowledge with practical analysis and an understanding of business implications.  We also will focus attention on critical policy issues related to this law, including a discussion of the emerging implications of "big data" principles on privacy rights and industry actions overall.   Beyond learning the general principles of the law in this new and evolving area, we will focus on how to be an effective lawyer and provide useful advice to clients in this new and challenging area.
LAWS 5268	Health Law and Policy Lab	3 Units	Students will complete substantive health-related legal and policy research projects requested by nonprofit organizations as pro bono clients of the Lab. Topics change yearly, reflecting clients' needs. Past clients include hospitals, physicians, the National Cancer Institute, community organizations and advocacy groups. With prior approval of the Instructor, completed work for this course may satisfy the JD Writing Requirement. Prereq or Coreq: LAWS 4806.
LAWS 5314	Cyberlaw	3 Units	This subject deals with how the law regulates and otherwise applies to activities taking place in 'cyberspace.'  It considers how existing legal principles are being modified and extended in the digital information age to meet the needs of society, particularly in relation to electronic commerce.  As the nature of dealings in cyberspace develops and new legal problems emerge over time, the focus of the subject may change to reflect current legal issues.  However, topics for discussion will be drawn from the following: the nature of the internet, legal regulation of cyberspace vs. self-regulation, the relevance of international law/international regulation, e-commerce contracting, 'property' in cyberspace with particular reference to intellectual property, trademarks and domain names, defamation on the Internet, online crime (e.g., fraud, pornography, etc.), information privacy and security, online dispute resolution and associated conflicts of law issues.
LAWS 5315	Entertainment Law	1 - 3 Units	This course is designed to introduce students to the basic legal issues relevant to the film and television industries, as well as live performances, theatre, and various other aspects of the entertainment industry.
LAWS 5319	International Intellectual Property	3 Units	
LAWS 5322	Intellectual Property & Dealmaking	2 Units	This course will provide you the opportunity to engage as an Intellectual Property (IP) specialist in a simulated M&A (merger and acquisition) corporate transaction.  You will assume the role of an associate attorney in a law firm and handle certain aspects of the sale of assets of a business, including engaging in due diligence, reviewing and drafting documents, conducting research, analyzing negotiation techniques, learning about the specialist's role in the transaction, and preparing for the closing of the transaction.  Particular emphasis will be upon IP licensing (e.g., patent licenses, trademark licenses, etc.), such as reviewing and drafting IP licensing documents.  You will learn skills that an IP lawyer should have by working on and resolving IP issues from actual projects.  Accordingly, it is vital to your success in this course that you complete all assignments on time and actively participate in each class.  Although this course is set within the context of a company acquisition, most of the IP issues you will be analyzing are generally applicable to many other projects that an IP associate will confront. Prereq: LAWS 4401 and (LAWS 4300 or LAWS 4302).
LAWS 5324	Law of the Music Industry	2 Units	This course will cover the major components of the music industry, including recording agreements, songwriting and music publishing concepts, personal management agreements, trademark issues, live performance agreements, termination of transfer, and other concepts.  Special attention will be paid to copyright infringement litigation, including a discussion of the most recent cases.  There will also be a class on fair use.  Guest speakers from a major concert promotion company and a major music publisher typically participate.  The class will include the latest on the Music Modernization Act and the successful transition of the recorded music industry to music streaming.  A student who attends the class will learn all aspects of music licensing.  A knowledge of copyright law is useful, but not required.
LAWS 5325	Museum Law	2 - 3 Units	This seminar is concerned with the relationship between the art world and the law.  The art world is comprised of numerous players, such as artists, dealers, museums, auction houses, art critics, forgers, thieves, looters, and the American and various foreign governments.  This course focuses on the law's relationship with each of these entities and how these entities relate to one another in both a cultural and legal sense.  In particular, this course will explore at least three of the following issues: theft and plunder of art (especially from 1933-45); the illicit international art trade; artists' rights such as First Amendment rights, copyright, moral rights, and the resale right; and the role and practice of museums in the art world, including provenance studies, and the museum's relationship with the artist and community.  The first class (and some subsequent classes) will be held at the Cleveland Museum of Art.  After a lecture by a museum curator, the students will be given a tour of the museum's collection that will focus on works of art  that have particular relevance to the intersection of law and art.
LAWS 5328	Intellectual Property and First Amendment in the Arts	3 Units	Students in this course will explore the First Amendment's protections for artistic and cultural expression and work directly on real-life issues for clients at the cutting edge of media and entertainment law. We will examine issues involving Hollywood studios, graffiti artists, virtual reality, reality television, art installations, electronic music, and journalism in still-evolving areas of law.  We will discuss issues facing media and entertainment lawyers in practice, and survey the roles lawyers play in the creative process.  Class members will work (under supervision) on client matters for the First Amendment and the Arts Project. Prereq: LAWS 4300, LAWS 4301, LAWS 4303 or LAWS 5717.
LAWS 5332	Sports Law	1 Unit	This introductory Sports Law course will offer an overview of the three major sports that dominate the American sports scene today: Major League Baseball, the National Football League, and the National Basketball Association. The course will devote approximately equal time to each of these three major sports and compare/contrast the similarities and differences among them, from a historical legal perspective. Other professional sports, including hockey and soccer, will also be discussed via updated links to the most relevant Sports Law news, which links will be provided prior to each class. Specifically, it will evaluate the legal evolution of America's 'three major leagues', and examine how the Supreme Court's, other courts', and arbitrators' landmark decisions have affected the path of each league's progress. Additionally, this course will address contemporary Sports Law topics, including COVID-19's impact upon the three major leagues, the recently executed 2020 NFL Collective Bargaining Agreement, and the world of esports (professional video gaming). Prereq: LAWS 4401 and LAWS 4405.
LAWS 5333	Representing the Professional Athlete	2 - 3 Units	This course will begin with an overview of the sports marketing industry and then proceed to discuss one of the more important legal doctrines relating to that industry, involving intellectual property, labor law, and contract law.  In that context, the course will explore the skills necessary to conduct a series of sports-related contract negotiations.  Students will participate in group-based contract drafting exercises, including drafting product endorsements and license agreements, with an emphasis on client representations.  Next, in the context of mock litigation, students will assume a contract breach, and will be required to draft deposition questions and legal briefs in support of their respective contractual position.
LAWS 5334	Representing the Musical Artist	2 - 3 Units	This course focuses on practical training in counseling the musical artist with a particular focus on lawyering skills such as contract drafting, strategic thinking and negotiation.  We follow the artist from the early days as a "baby band" to when the artist becomes "classic" or "heritage."  You will observe the artist in the recording studio, the interactions among the band members, the creation of songs/sound recordings.  You will introduced to the cast of characters: the producer; the first manager; the label's A&R person; the recording engineer, and others.  You will--as music lawyers commonly do--observe the artist creating in the studio and on a live stage and get a chance to speak with prominent managers, concert promoters, club owners, and artists.
LAWS 5335	Negotiation Strategies in Sports Management	2 - 3 Units	This course covers drafting of sophisticated contractual documents in the Sports Law world.  Document that will be negotiated and drafted include a lease agreement between a municipality that is constructing a new stadium/arena and the owner/operator of a team that will play in the new venue.  Also covered will be naming rights, presenting sponsorship agreements for beverage/food, automobile/rental cars, and financial/medical services.  We will also examine coordination of all sponsorships in the team's print/multimedia advertising, as well as with the broadcasts of the team's games.
LAWS 5336	Intellectual Property Advanced Topics Seminar	2 Units	This course is designed to provide students with an overview of several areas of law traditionally associated with intellectual property or IP, including copyright law, which pertains to the protection of literary, musical, and artistic creations and has issues replete with First Amendment implications; patent law and trade secret law, which focus on the protection of technological works ranging from chemical formulae, to software, to biotechnology; and trademark law, which relates to the goodwill associated with corporate identity and product recognition.  We will also devote time to the study of the philosophy and economics of intellectual property keeping in mind, throughout the course, the need to strike an optimal balance between incentives to create and commercialize intellectual creations on the one hand and public access to these creations on the other hand. Prereq: LAWS 4301 or LAWS 4302.
LAWS 5339	Privacy Law	3 Units	The rapid grown of the Internet, coupled with new business practices and new efforts by government to deploy technology for law enforcement and the administration of programs, has raised far-reaching questions about the future of privacy.  The role of law is central to many of these debates.    This course begins by introducing students to the historic and philosophical justifications for recognizing a right of privacy.  It then explores how those justifications have been applied to information gathered by the media, law enforcement, and private organizations.  The course considers the developing principles for data collection, use, and security in general, and the extent to which legal protections exist in specific subject areas such as health and genetic information, and social, financial, and political activities. Students will learn the rules governing places, information, information integrity, and data security as developed under common law, statutes, regulations, and the U.S. Constitution.  While the course focuses primarily upon U.S. law, it will regularly draw comparisons with EU privacy protection, and will also explore those rules on their own.
LAWS 5341	Commercialization and Intellectual Property Management	3 Units	This interdisciplinary course covers a variety of topics, including principles of intellectual property and intellectual property management, business strategies and modeling relevant to the creation of start-up companies and exploitation of IP rights as they relate to biomedical-related inventions.  The goal of this course is to address issues relating to the commercialization of biomedical-related inventions by exposing law students, MBA students, and Ph.D. candidates (in genetics and proteomics) to the challenges and opportunities encountered when attempting to develop biomedical intellectual property from the point of early discovery to the clinic and market.  Specifically, this course seeks to provide students with the ability to value a given technological advance or invention holistically, focusing on issues that extend beyond scientific efficacy and include patient and practitioner value propositions, legal and intellectual property protection, business modeling, potential market impacts, market competition, and ethical, social, and healthcare practitioner acceptance.  During this course, law students, MBA students, and Ph.D. candidates in genomics and proteomics will work in teams of five (two laws students, two MBA students and one Ph.D. candidate), focusing on issues of commercialization and IP management of biomedical-related inventions.  The instructors will be drawn from the law school, business school, and technology-transfer office.  Please visit the following website for more information: fusioninnovate.com. Offered as EBME 467, ECSE 467, GENE 367, GENE 467, LAWS 5341, MGMT 467, and RGME 467.
LAWS 5365	World Intellectual Property Organization Research Lab	3 Units	The course will explore cutting-edge issues directly at the interface between research and policy in international intellectual property at the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). WIPO is the pre-eminent international institution responsible for the development, management, and coordination of international intellectual property. As it moves into its new 21st century mission and interaction with global policy issues such as public health, climate change, WIPO has a need for a stronger evidence and research base for its work on treaty development and technical assistance to countries. Students in the course will carry out cutting edge research on issues at the core of WIPO's work on the future of the international IP system. Working with the WIPO Traditional Knowledge, Genetic Resources and Folklore division, students will work in teams on specific research tasks with a finished written study or brief at the end of the course for internal WIPO use, and where appropriate, for broader dissemination. Projects may include carrying out country studies; comparative analyses of patent-related provisions in traditional knowledge laws; assessing implementation of international traditional knowledge, and folklore obligations in domestic law; assessing the state of play in negotiations and processes in other forums such as the Convention in Biological Diversity, the TRIPS Council, or the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations. Prereq: LAWS 4101 or LAWS 4300 or LAWS 4301 or LAWS 4302.
LAWS 5366	Venture Finance & Transactions	2 Units	This course is designed to provide law students with the fundamentals of creating, offering and closing a technology venture transaction.  In each case, the goal is to imbue students with both the legal and compliance requirements of the given strategic scenario, as well as the business and technical drivers behind the transaction. Prereq or Coreq: LAWS 4401.
LAWS 5401	International Tax	3 Units	This course examines the U.S. taxation of transactions undertaken by foreign individuals or entities in the U.S. as well as the U.S. taxation of transactions undertaken by U.S. individuals or entities abroad.  Major topics that will be covered include determination of the source of income, the taxation of income derived from a U.S. trade or business, the withholding tax regime, taxation of various entities, controlled foreign corporations, the U.S. anti-deferral rules, the U.S. foreign tax credit, taxation of foreign currency transactions and the role of tax treaties. Prereq: LAWS 5403 or LAWS 5404.
LAWS 5402	Estate Planning	3 Units	This course covers the federal law of estate and gift taxation.  Topics include the computation of the estate tax, the taxation of gifts, the assets included in the gross estate, deductions from the gross estate to compute the taxable estate, credits against the tax, the generation-skipping transfer tax, and estate planning ideas and techniques, such as the use of trusts.  The income taxation of estates and trusts is also covered. Grade is based on class participation and a major written paper on a topic chosen by the student and approved in advance by the instructor. Prereq or Coreq: LAWS 4809.
LAWS 5403	Federal Taxation of Corporation and Partnerships	3 Units	The course will focus on the basic provisions of the federal income taxation of partnerships and corporations.  The topics will include the formation of the entity, distributions to partners and shareholders, the allocation of profits and losses in a partnership, S corporations, redemptions, liquidations, mergers and acquisitions, corporate or partnership divisions, and certain corporate penalty taxes such as the accumulated earnings tax and the personal holding company tax.
LAWS 5412	Advanced Securities Regulation	3 Units	This course will expand on the disclosure and enforcement themes discussed in the Securities Regulation (LAWS 307) survey course to engage in an in-depth examination of selected real-world securities topics.  The focus will be to deepen the student's understanding of the SEC regulatory regime through consideration of current "hot topics" in securities law (such as executive compensation, 8-K disclosures, loss contingencies and Management's Discussion & Analysis), by reviewing SEC pronouncements and working with actual or hypothetical disclosure and counseling situations. In addition to analyzing rules, students will participate in drafting, analyzing and commenting on sample disclosure documents and client advice memos.   The course is designed to further the student's understanding of a corporate/securities law practice as well as deepen the student's substantive knowledge in securities regulation law. Prereq: LAWS 5431.
LAWS 5413	Antitrust Law	3 Units	A study of the implementation of federal trade regulation statutes with emphasis on the interrelationship of these laws with the competitive tensions of the contemporary economy.
LAWS 5415	Bankruptcy	3 Units	An introduction to bankruptcy law, with emphasis on the current Federal Bankruptcy Code.  The course includes Chapter 7 (liquidation bankruptcy proceedings), Chapter 11 (business reorganizations), and Chapter 13 (simplified reorganizations for individuals and sole proprietorships).  Also considered are various state law debtor-creditor remedies and the impact of bankruptcy on such remedies.  Prior enrollment in the UCC and debtor-creditor courses may be helpful but is not mandatory.
LAWS 5418	Corporate Real Estate Transactions	2 Units	Real estate is typically the largest single category of capital investment and the second largest category of repeat expense (after total personnel costs) for most businesses.  Major industrial and service sector companies are increasingly focused on the opportunities and challenges inherent in the real estate portfolios that support their core operations.  This course will highlight the strategic case for effective corporate real estate management and the role of inside and outside legal counsel in the commercial real estate context.  The course will consider advanced transactional situations, including purchase and sale of commercial properties, leasing of business properties, and complex industrial facilities.  The course's emphasis on case studies and commercial transaction scenarios are also designed to act as a capstone course that complements and draws upon the students' prior coursework in contracts, real estate and commercial transactions, ethics and government regulation.  Three parallel case studies will run throughout the course, illustrating the application of each topic to different types of client organizations: a Fortune 500 industrial company, a small family-owned retail business, and a medium-sized not-for-profit organization with several sites.  Each client organization will have mock client representatives who will have different business and style preferences, which the class will need to accommodate and will come to anticipate in fashioning and recommending solutions for each client.  The final exam will build from these same client scenarios, offering the class participants an opportunity to apply their learning to make recommendations to each client with respect to specific situations and goals.
LAWS 5420	ERISA	4 Units	This class will cover employee benefits law.  (ERISA): defined benefit plans, including in-depth consideration of defined benefit plan documents; VEBA's, their use and regulation; group life, Accidental Death & Dismemberment, and Long Term Disability plans and related insurance documents; insured and non-insured medical benefit plans; reporting and disclosure requirements of ERISA, including summary plan descriptions, summary of material modifications, Form 5500, and "top hat" elections; and requests for favorable determinations of qualified plans, including Form 5300 and Notices to Interested Parties.
LAWS 5422	Financial Markets: Law, Theory, and Practice	2 Units	Explores the interactions of law, principles of finance, and the theoretical underpinnings of financial markets.  It introduces students to the roots of evolving financial market liabilities affecting the interests and conduct of people at all levels in those markets by examining (a) the structure and purpose of financial markets, (b) the financial and capital market theories which today shape the contours of the law, (c) intermediation in financial markets, and (d) the challenges of global market regulation.
LAWS 5423	Financial System Integrity	3 Units	In this course, which is offered alternately as either a lab or a seminar, students study and research key aspects of the international financial system integrity rules, with a focus on the anti-money laundering and terrorism financing standards of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and the Basel Core Principles on Banking Supervision of the Basel Committee (as well as similar standards promulgated for other financial institutions).  When offered as a lab, the course engages students in projects for a variety of organizations involved in improving the integrity of financial institutions, including the FATF (as well as FATF-style regional bodies), the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and locally based governmental and non-governmental organizations.  Students satisfactorily completing this course will be eligible to apply for a fully paid summer internship with a local bank that will involve work in the bank's legal, anti-money laundering and financial intelligence units.   Recommended preparation: LAWS 4405 and LAWS 5431.
LAWS 5424	Insurance	3 Units	A comprehensive introduction to the regulation of the insurance industry and to the legal issues arising from relations between the parties to insurance contracts. The course examines statutory regulation of the industry by state and federal agencies and analyzes cases involving aggressive regulation by the judiciary as well. Insurance decisions on the cutting edge of developments in contract, tort, and agency law are studied. Students are required to study the policy forms most frequently encountered in practice: the automobile policy, the homeowner's policy, and the life insurance policy. The course also provides exposure to problems relating to other areas of insurance including commercial general liability coverage, fire insurance, professional liability (malpractice) coverage, and health insurance.
LAWS 5426	International Real Estate Transactions	2 Units	The course will explore selected topics involved in international real estate transactions, from the perspective of an American counsel representing an American entity doing business abroad.  Topics may include structuring, transactional goals, due diligence, letters of intent and documentation, deal implementation, title protection, and others.  The course will use traditional learning techniques as well as case studies and simulations, with a major focus on letters of intent/documentation.  Students will be graded based on class participation and presentations, written assignments, and a final paper/take home exam. Recommended preparation: LAWS 5429 (may be taken concurrently).
LAWS 5427	Mergers and Acquisitions	3 Units	Topics include the corporate and securities law governing various forms of mergers and acquisitions; business motivations for mergers; concerns of acquiring and acquired companies in friendly mergers; bidders' techniques and targets' defenses in hostile tender offers and proxy contests; valuation of businesses and investments, portfolio theory, and capital markets; concerns of companies and investors in negotiating corporate financing. Prereq: LAWS 4401.
LAWS 5429	Real Estate Transactions and Finance	2 - 3 Units	Covers basic real estate transactions as well as issues involved in complex finance and development. Topics include: brokers, land contracts of sale, deeds and title covenants, the recording system, title insurance, mortgages, shopping center development, cooperatives and condominiums, ground lease financing, construction lending, distressed properties, selected federal income tax issues, and the real estate attorney's professional responsibilities.  Whenever possible, issues will be examined in the context of model transactions.
LAWS 5430	Consumer Protection	3 Units	Students will study the complex and varied laws that govern consumer transactions. Topics may include: fraud and deception; credit reporting and identity theft; consumer loans, including mortgages and payday loans; debt servicing; credit discrimination; and the role of the key federal and state agencies in this area, including the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the Federal Trade Commission, and state Attorneys General and banking departments.
LAWS 5431	Securities Regulation	3 Units	This course explores the policies and techniques of state and federal investor protection, with emphasis on the distribution of securities by issuers and their affiliates. After an analysis of express general anti-fraud remedies, the "security" concept, and the diverse philosophies underlying "value judgment" and "disclosure" approaches to regulation of business fund-raising practices, the course proceeds to a full consideration of the impact of the Federal Securities Act of 1933 on primary and secondary distributions. Concurrent as well as independent effects of state blue sky laws, typified by the Uniform Securities Act, are also treated. To round out the total pattern of investor protection in the distributional setting, the course includes limited excursions into the anti-fraud, periodic reporting, public information availability, and broker-dealer aspects of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Prereq: LAWS 4401.
LAWS 5432	Business and Law Colloquium	3 Units	This course will bring together law students, business students, mid-level attorneys and senior leaders in the legal field for a one-semester weekly colloquium.    Even though women have represented approximately half of law-school graduates for a number of years, women represent only 16% of law firm equity partners and even fewer corporate General Counsels. This course aims to offer an introduction to the business skills that both women and men will need to rise to the highest levels of law practice and organizational leadership. Each week will focus on a different aspect of law and business. The curriculum will include sessions focused in financial management, business development, communication skills, and intercultural business and law practices. Offered as LAWS 5432 and BLAW 411.
LAWS 5433	Payment Systems	3 Units	One of the basic courses in commercial law, dealing with the law of negotiable instruments and bank collections and deposits. These topics are considered primarily under the Uniform Commercial Code and, to some extent, recent federal banking and consumer credit legislation.
LAWS 5434	Secured Transactions	3 Units	This course deals with Article 9 of the UCC and other legal and equitable rules relating to the use of personal property as security for debts.  Topics covered include creation of a security interest (mortgage), rights and obligations of the debtor (mortgagor) and the secured party (mortgagee), priority of interests in the same property, redemption rights of the debtor, and foreclosure of a security interest by the mortgagee.  May not be taken by students who have taken or are taking the 4-credit Sales and Secured Transactions course (LAWS 5435).  Students who have taken or are planning to take the 3-credit Sales (LAWS 4404) course may enroll.
LAWS 5436	Financial Institutions Regulation	3 Units	This course examines the regulation of financial institutions, with an emphasis on the federal regulation of U.S. banks and their affiliates. It focuses on the statutes that govern banking, the important cases that define the limits of banking powers, and the ever-increasing role of the regulatory agencies.  The discussion will be viewed through the lens of the 2008-2010 financial crisis and the current challenges caused by the pandemic. It will review current enforcement orders issued by the regulatory agencies that have changed the banking landscape as much as the statutes upon which they are based. The discussion will also include relevant references to the International Basel Accords, which are the global standards for the regulation and supervision of banks.
LAWS 5438	Business Organizations Research Seminar	2 Units	An opportunity to undertake significant research and writing on the law of business organizations.  Each student will be expected to complete a major paper in satisfaction of the upper level writing requirement.  A satisfactory paper will meet the writing requirement for the concentration in Business Organizations.  Limited to 12. Prereq: LAWS 4401.
LAWS 5439	Corporate Finance	3 Units	This course provides both an introduction to important financial concepts and, more centrally, an investigation of how those concepts come into play in the law (particularly corporate law).  Topics covered will include: the capital asset pricing model, the efficient capital market hypothesis, the characteristics of debt and equity financing, options, and hedging.  The course assumes no familiarity with these financial concepts, and while the math involved is critical, it will also be elementary.  Throughout, the emphasis will be on gaining the ability to use concepts from finance in the context of legal problems. Prereq: LAWS 4401.
LAWS 5501	Risk Management	4 Units	This course explores the methods and policies for allocating losses from harm to one's person, property, relations, and economic and other interests. The course covers the substantive principles of tort claims and their defenses, as well as claims activities in the period between the event that gave rise to the claim and the time that litigation commences, the phases of litigation of a claim (from pre-trial to settlement, including discovery), and basic concepts relating to handling activities in the post-litigation period, such as reporting, data analysis, and initiatives to prevent future events. In addition, this course will also explore how statutes and regulations come into existence, whether or not they are valid, and how courts interpret them, in order to better understand the risks associated with regulatory compliance failures, both civil and criminal.
LAWS 5705	International & US Family Law	3 Units	This is an advanced course addressing practical family law topics.  The course will cover fundamental United States family law issues as well as essential issues that touch on international aspects of family law, including a focus on the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction.  Students will be required to understand domestic and international statutes, case law and treaties and to apply their skills to simulated domestic and international fact patterns.  Students can expect experienced lawyers as guest lecturers and participation of other family law practitioners throughout the course in an effort to provide a well-rounded experience.
LAWS 5706	Advanced Legal Research	3 Units	This course will provide students with the practice-ready research skills needed when entering an externship, work setting or the practice of law. The focus will be on learning to research efficiently and cost-effectively with exposure to current technologies used in legal practice. The course will expose students to the skills needed in presenting thorough and reliable research to a supervisor or a court. The class will be formulated in a way that will allow students to spend much class time specifically working on research problems where they can get real time assistance.
LAWS 5707	Alternative Dispute Resolution	3 Units	Students will examine the processes of alternative dispute resolution (ADR) through reading materials, videotapes, guest lectures, and simulation exercises. Particular emphasis will be given to the interaction of lawyers and clients in business negotiations and in litigation. Negotiation, arbitration, mediation, and the mini-trial will be examined. The class will also cover impediments to ADR, such as lack of understanding or hostility on the part of clients or lawyers.
LAWS 5708	Electronic Discovery	3 Units	Electronic Discovery provides an in-depth treatment of the legal, technical, and cost management issues involving identification, preservation, collection, review, and production of electronically stored information ("ESI") in civil litigation. This course will cover how the federal rules of civil procedure, such as the 2006 FRCP ESI amendments: (Rules 26 meet and confer, 34 production, and 37 sanctions), and the Federal Rules of Evidence, such as FRE 502 (privilege review and production), along with the rapidly developing ESI case law affect this important aspect of litigation. The class will explore e-discovery software, providing training and exercise hypotheticals in which students will become familiar with the practical side of e-discovery.
LAWS 5709	Animal Law	2 Units	The goals of the course are to:  a. Provide a clear understanding of the status of animal law as it currently exists, with an emphasis on recent statutes and caselaw;  b. Explore how the law handles animals and animal-related issues in comparison with humans and other property;  c. Provide a hands-on, practical experience for students who wish to grapple with cases involving animal law with either a moot court or special research project;  d. Get students to think about and develop their own philosophy as it relates to animal law, and to test legal theories for advancing animal jurisprudence in the direction they deem appropriate.
LAWS 5711	Civil Rights	3 Units	This course will examine the enforcement of federal civil rights against the government, government officials, and private individuals. The course will focus partly on the unique issues and challenges involved in litigating civil rights cases, and approximately the first half of the semester will be spent on 42 U.S.C. § 1983, the "all-purpose" civil rights statute. We will discuss the mechanics of litigating federal civil rights cases, such as the state action requirement, absolute and qualified immunities, liability of municipalities, limitations on injunctive relief, and attorney's fees. Much of the second half of the semester will be devoted to other civil rights statutes, such as the Fair Housing Act, the Voting Rights Act, Title IX, and Title VI. The course will not cover statutes dealing with discrimination in the workplace, however, as those topics are treated fully in the Employment Discrimination course.
LAWS 5712	Community Development Law	2 Units	An examination of the law of economic and land development in underserved and deteriorated areas.  Legal issues related to business organization, financing, real estate development, governmental programs, and regulation and taxation (among other areas) will be covered.  Topics include background of urban deterioration, governmental and private sources of assistance, organizing the developing entity, financing the project, governmental programs, tax policy and programs, land assemble, and administration of developments.
LAWS 5716	Conflict of Laws	2 Units	Competing approaches to choice of law in cases having multi-state and/or multi-national contacts. The course also covers personal jurisdiction, constitutional and international limitations on choice of law, and enforcement of judgments. Comparative and international perspectives are integrated throughout. Students develop their own choice of law theory in a simulated restatement conference.
LAWS 5717	Constitutional Law II	3 Units	This course explores the individual freedoms protected by the First Amendment. Primary attention is devoted to the freedoms of speech, assembly, and association. The course analyzes what is protected, why it is protected, and to what degree it is protected. Topics covered include prior restraint, advocacy of unlawful conduct, the hostile audience, defamation, commercial speech, obscenity, offensive speech, expression on public property, and symbolic speech.
LAWS 5718	Criminal Procedure II	2 Units	The adjudicatory stage of the criminal process. Pretrial release, preliminary hearings, grand jury practice, speedy and public trial, discovery, right to jury trial, guilty pleas, right to counsel, and double jeopardy are examined. Prereq: LAWS 4807.
LAWS 5720	Death Penalty Law and Process	2 Units	The course offers a review of the death penalty process, theory, and law from trial through execution, including examination of state laws and federal habeas corpus law.  The course focuses on the legal principles implicated by the death penalty and also examines the social issues it raises including the social/legal arguments against the death penalty, race and gender issues, and the influence of political and other factors on the process. Recommended preparation: Evidence (LAWS 4808 or LAWS 4906).
LAWS 5721	Death Penalty Lab	3 Units	This Lab will involve students in an integrated experience of academic research and public service. Students will work on semester-long research projects arising from actual death penalty cases that will be of assistance to practitioners in death penalty cases or research projects for governmental and non-governmental organizations engaged in support for, opposition to, or reform of the death penalty at a local state, national, or global level. Issues may include: victim's rights; jury selection (race/gender discrimination); proportionality (discrepancies in geographic application or application to different fact patterns); economic impact on the system; clemency; and transnational problems with foreign accused; systemic review (e.g., Illinois commission); and other specific recurring issues arising from innocence, assistance of counsel, experts, jury instructions, or misconduct (judge, attorney, jury). The students will have no direct representation responsibilities.
LAWS 5722	Death Penalty Lab II	2 Units	This lab will involve students in an integrated experience of academic research and public service.  As enrollment is limited to students who have successfully completed Lab I, these students will assume a supervisory role working with Lab I students. Students will work on research projects arising from actual death penalty cases that will be of assistance to practitioners in death penalty cases or research projects for governmental and non-governmental organizations engaged in support for, opposition to, or reform of the death penalty at a local state, national, or global level.  Issues may include: jury selection issues; proportionality issues; economic impact of the application of the death penalty; examination of issues surrounding a specific state's ability to provide a viable clemency; issues of international law; research, investigation, and litigation of case specific issues ranging from actual innocence, ineffective assistance of counsel, ineffective assistance of experts, prosecutorial misconduct, judicial misconduct, juror misconduct, etc. Prereq: LAWS 5721.
LAWS 5724	Discrimination in Employment	3 Units	This course will examine the federal laws concerning discrimination in the workplace. These include Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, the Equal Pay Act, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act. We will study the regulation of discrimination based on race, sex, religion, national origin, age, disability, and genetic status, including policy and ethical question and strategic considerations in prosecuting and defending employment-based civil rights actions.
LAWS 5725	Education Law	3 Units	This course surveys the legal and social policy challenges related to public education settings.  Students will study relevant constitutional issues, legislative mandates, school vouchers to supplement tuitions in private schools, charter schools, and more recent attempts under state constitutions to provide a quality education for all children.  Beyond analyzing the legal frameworks that shape public education, the course will also cover the difficulties confronting public education from a sociological perspective.
LAWS 5726	Employment Law	3 Units	This course examines employer-employee relations in non-union settings.  Topics include wrongful discharge, occupational safety and health regulation, minimum wage, and workplace privacy issues.  The course emphasizes written work, including advanced legal research training.  Minimal overlap with Labor Law (LAWS 5737) and Discrimination in Employment (LAWS 5724).
LAWS 5727	Environmental Law	3 Units	The course is designed to provide an overview of both the breadth and depth of environmental regulation in the United States and to consider ways our environmental regulatory system might be improved. Although all of the major environmental laws will be surveyed, several statutes will be examined in greater detail. Students will be expected to navigate select provisions of statutes and regulations through in-class problem sets. Guest speakers will also be invited to speak on topics of current interest.
LAWS 5728	ePayment Systems	1 Unit	This seminar builds on the foundation established during the first-year curriculum and focuses on the law and technology of payment systems.  Such topics will include the contractual relationship amongst and between the various organizations transacting to enable a b2c payment; the various elements of such agreements; the various impacts of a payment system (criminal, civil, and administrative); the implications for legal structure and policy; and the ethical considerations of a lawyer advising clients within this domain.  Grade is based on a paper, a presentation, and class attendance and participation.
LAWS 5729	Expert Witnesses and Scientific Evidence	2 Units	This course will examine the rules for the admissibility of expert testimony, provide an introduction to various types of expert and scientific evidence, understand the special role of experts in litigation, and provide practice-focused consideration of issues relating to expert evidence. Prereq: LAWS 1201 and LAWS 4808.
LAWS 5730	Family Law	3 Units	This survey course covers law relating to the creation, functioning, and dissolution of the family as a legal unit. Topics include legitimacy, adoption, procreative rights, cohabitation, marriage, family obligations, division of marital property, divorce and annulment, and child custody. Particular attention is given to the social forces that affect the development of rules and policies.
LAWS 5731	Federal Courts	3 Units	This course explores the relationships between the federal courts, Congress, and state courts and governments.  Topics include congressional control of federal jurisdiction, justiciability, federal court abstention, suits against state and federal governments and officials, habeas corpus, and federal injunctions on state proceedings.
LAWS 5733	Immigration Law	2 Units	The general principles of immigration law and procedure, including federal authority to regulate immigration, removal of aliens (deportation and exclusion), administrative and judicial review, fleeing persecution (refugees, asylees, and others), immigrant and nonimmigrant visas, and consular practice.  The course will emphasize practical application of current immigration law.
LAWS 5734	Immigration Law II	1 Unit	The course is dedicated to the study of visas for visitors and aliens of extraordinary ability in the sciences, arts, or entertainment. Course materials will be drawn from Legomsky's Immigration and Refugee Law and Policy, the Immigration and Nationality Act, and Title 8 (CFR).  Students will be required to write a paper or prepare a visa petition.  The course will likely be offered every other year. Prereq: LAWS 5733.
LAWS 5736	Juvenile Law	2 Units	The role of the juvenile court in society: its jurisdiction, procedures, and dispositional alternatives. Students study both the quasi-criminal aspects of the juvenile court (jurisdiction over juvenile delinquents and status offenders) and the civil-protective aspects of the court (termination of parental rights and the handling of neglected, dependent, and abused children). In addition, the rights afforded juveniles are compared with the rights afforded adults in comparable circumstances. Many related juvenile justice issues, such as the right of a minor female to have an abortion without parental notice and the constitutionality of capital punishment for juvenile offenders, are also examined.
LAWS 5737	Labor Law	3 Units	The basic course in the area of union-management relations, designed both for students desiring to pursue the field further and for those whose interest lies in an introduction to legal principles in this area. The course begins with a brief historical study of the evolution of the labor movement and prestatutory law. It then considers federal regulation under the National Labor Relations Act of union organizational efforts, management-union interaction, and the representational process, then proceeds to the collective bargaining process. The collective bargaining process is examined in some depth with special emphasis on the scope and substance of the duty to bargain in good faith, the enforcement of collective bargaining agreements in courts and by arbitrators, and the legal regulation of industrial warfare, the strike and lockout.
LAWS 5738	Land Use Control	3 Units	This course analyzes the public control of land use, primarily at the local and state levels. Both legal and policy perspectives are considered. Attention is given to constitutional limitations such as the takings doctrine, equal protection, and due process. Topics considered include zoning, subdivision controls, exclusionary regulations, and historic preservation.
LAWS 5739	Law of Archeological Relics	2 Units	This course addresses the private and public law relating to the ownership, sale, use, and repatriation of archeological artifacts other than human remains.  The readings include excerpts from articles and books regarding the international trade (legal and illegal) in such artifacts.  Significant attention is given to international law, such as the UNESCO Convention on Cultural Property.
LAWS 5744	Mediation Representation: Theory, Principle and Practice	3 Units	An advanced course exploring the fundamentals of conflict, mediation theory, doctrine and practice, its historical evolution and increasing use as a centerpiece of modern legal dispute resolution.  The course will cover the theory, doctrine, history and practice of mediation; the mediation process; the mediator's, client's, and advocate's role in mediation; the underlying principles of bargaining, risk and value and how to adapt these negotiation skills for a mediation setting.  Students will also learn how to use mediation as a problem-solver for the client.  Format is lecture, discussion and student presentation and simulation.  The course includes the writing of mediation memoranda, as well as mediation role playing, with critique from the teachers and invited guest mediation practitioners.
LAWS 5745	Foreign Affairs Law	3 Units	Provides a study of the separation of powers in national security matters, presidential war powers, congressional and presidential emergency powers, the domestic effect of international law, the use of military force in international relations, investigating national security threats, the Freedom of Information and Privacy Acts, access to national security information in the federal courts, and restraints on disclosing and publishing national security information.  The course builds upon a strong foundation of constitutional law and addresses the fundamental tension that exists in our foreign and domestic affairs by virtue of the constitutional separation of powers between the respective branches of government.  Several classroom hours will be spent dealing with constitutional war powers and how the executive and legislative branches have tried to define their respective measures of expressed and implied power with regard to the Vietnam War, the War Powers Resolution of 1973, and more recent US incursions such as the first Persian Gulf War and the most recent invasion of Iraq.
LAWS 5747	Philosophy of Law	3 Units	This is an examination of the general nature of law, the broad concerns of jurisprudence, the study of comparative law, and many of the issues raised in the literature of legal philosophy. Students will examine the principles of legal positivism, mitigated natural law, and rights theory. Selected readings and cases will illustrate these theories, which will also be examined in the context of rule selection by new governments in developing or revolutionary societies. The course also looks at the general nature of legal systems: how politics, morality, and individual views of justice and rights affect particular court cases and the course and development of law generally. Topics will include abortion, obscenity and sin, civil disobedience, affirmative action, surrogatehood, and the death penalty. This is unlike any other of the legal theory or jurisprudence courses, and those who have sampled legal theory elsewhere in a different form are welcome and encouraged to enroll. Recommended preparation: PHIL 101. Offered as LAWS 5747, PHIL 335, and PHIL 435.
LAWS 5748	Poverty Law	3 Units	This course will examine the meaning and historical origins of poverty in the United States and the structural factors that contribute to legal inequities. The course will also explore ways in which legal assistance is funded and delivered to low-income individuals. It will review the landmark constitutional cases that form the body of poverty law and then examine substantive legal topics that affect the poor differently, including public benefits, health care, and housing.
LAWS 5749	Prisoner Rights & Litigation	3 Units	This course explores the complex areas of habeas corpus and prisoner § 1983 litigation.  The course explores the legal, procedural, social, economic and other issues surrounding federal court review of state court criminal convictions, conditions of confinement for prisoners, and prisoner rights.  Topics will include standards of review, substantive rights, federal jurisdiction, and Constitutional reaches and limits.
LAWS 5751	Scientific Evidence in Criminal Litigation	2 Units	The legal issues associated with the use of scientific evidence at trial. It examines the admissibility of scientific evidence, expert testimony, and related issues. In addition, it considers specific techniques such as forensic pathology, fingerprint comparison, firearms identification, bite mark comparisons, questioned document examinations, and polygraph and DNA evidence testing. Outside experts are used to present many of the topics.
LAWS 5753	Child Welfare	3 Units	This course explores the underlying principles of child welfare.  We will look at the state's right to intervene where children are being abused or neglected; legal and psychological parameters of neglect; the parent's right to raise children as they see fit, including the use of corporal punishment; the termination of parental rights; the role of an attorney GAL; legal representation of the agency and parents in child welfare hearings; and the liability of child welfare agencies.    The format is lecture, discussion and student presentation, and simulation.  The course includes a trial and concludes with a final paper and student presentations on topics of their choice.
LAWS 5754	Energy Law	2 - 3 Units	Energy law is a large and growing area of increased importance. Energy use and production is subject to a wide range of state and federal laws. This course will focus on current energy law issues, particularly issues relating to production and use of electrical power. The course covers the interplay of state and federal regulation, utility rate regulation, energy production, and regulation of the environmental consequences of energy production and use, including climate change.
LAWS 5755	LGBT Legal Issues	3 Units	The course will address the development of legislation and case law dealing with LBGT rights in different practice areas including family law, estate planning, and employment law. Further, the course will deal with possible scenarios for future legislative and judicial activity.
LAWS 5756	Elder Law	3 Units	This course examines a number of legal, ethical, and social issues raised by our nation's growing elder population. It aims to do so in a way that is not only interesting for the general law school population, but also practical for those considering a career that involves advising older adults and those who may be called upon to assist elderly friends and family members.   Focus is on the practical application of the current laws in Elder Law. Special attention is given to: (i) elder abuse, neglect, and financial exploitation; (ii) end-of-life issues, including health care directives and surrogacy; (iii) guardianships; (iv) managing and paying for health care, including Medicaid, Medicare, long-term care insurance, and health care reform issues; (v) property management, including durable powers of attorney for property, joint ownership and financial accounts, and estate planning to ensure Medicaid and/or Medicare coverage; (vi) ethical issues in elder representation; (vii) remedies available to vulnerable adults, such as criminal, administrative, and civil remedies, including medical malpractice. Finally, through simulated client cases, students will learn how to prepare documents related to surrogate decision-making, including drafting an Advanced Healthcare Directive, an Appointment of a Healthcare Agent, and a Personal Financial Powers of Attorney, as well as documents relating to the appeal of the denial of Medicare and Medicaid benefits.
LAWS 5757	Mass Media Law and Policy	4 Units	This survey course will examine the constitutional, statutory, administrative, public and private regulation of media. The laws applicable to television and radio broadcast, cable, satellite, newsprint, wire and wireless telephony industries will be analyzed to grow understanding of contemporary issues. We will also focus on the structure and function of the Federal Communications Commission, its policies and processes of airwave allocation, licensing and licensing renewal, internet regulation, and media ownership. Finally, this course will examine the role media has in framing and articulating what we intake in forms of entertainment and news, and how those frames impact our views of public policy and culture.
LAWS 5758	Protest, Policing, and The First Amendment	3 Units	In this course, we engage in a holistic study of seminal Supreme Court cases surrounding freedom of speech, hate speech, incitement, freedom of assembly and association, and the right to petition. You will also learn and apply mass media theories to develop thoughtful critiques of newsgathering, news reporting and news dissemination. Integrating principles of mass media analysis, you will also learn and apply critical theories to rhetorical, visual and aural analyses of media text. We will continually evaluate how our readings inform and shape recent socio-legal-political events and issues such as events in Ferguson, Missouri, Cleveland, Ohio, and Charlottesville, Virginia.
LAWS 5760	The Wire and the War on Drugs	3 Units	Many currently criticize the American criminal justice system for being too severe and, in particular, having an unfairly harsh impact on African Americans. These complaints typically focus on the war on drugs and the way the American criminal justice system has prosecuted and punished drug offenses for the past several decades. This course uses the HBO series The Wire as a lens for understanding and evaluating the war on drugs. Students will examine: current drug offenses, the policy debate about legalization and decriminalization of drugs, conspiracy law, approaches to sentencing, the law of electronic surveillance, the fourth amendment, interrogation, the use of informants, the use of computerized statistical data to manage police departments, prisoner reentry programs and the influence of the media on criminal justice policy.
LAWS 5761	Social Advocacy and First Amendment Practicum	2 Units	This course involves students in an integrated experience of academic research and public service that explores the foundational case law involved in representing journalists, researchers, protesters, and other civil rights plaintiffs at the forefront of social issues. The course focuses on the rights conferred under the First Amendment: the right to free expression and the right of access to information. Coursework is tied to supporting live-client matters and advocacy projects. Students may work on a variety of matters, from protecting the right to inspect government records, to legal issues surrounding speaking, assembly, and protests.
LAWS 5762	Urban Development Lab	2 Units	This course will involve students in an integrated experience of academic research and public service to the Greater Cleveland area. Students will work on semester long research projects arising from issues raised by local nonprofit development organizations and the development arms of other local nonprofit groups and government agencies. Specific topics will vary from semester to semester, but will generally fall within (i) barriers to development of urban properties, (ii) the role of local government and communities in encouraging or discouraging development projects and (iii) solutions for making urban areas, in general, and Cleveland, in particular, more livable and sustainable. When possible, students will present their findings directly to the organization (s) raising the issue. Students can expect direct or indirect exposure to aspects of real estate, finance, land use, tax and other regulatory law.
LAWS 5763	White Collar Crime: Prosecution and Defense	2 Units	This course provides students with an overview of white collar crime through the lens of recent white collar criminal investigations and prosecutions.  In addition to understanding the basics of white collar crime and what it is, the role of different parts of the federal government in investigating and prosecuting white collar crime, corporate vs. individual responsibility, and privilege issues, we will examine specific white collar offenses, including mail fraud and wire fraud, perjury, making false statements, obstruction of justice, and securities fraud.
LAWS 5764	Workers' Compensation	2 Units	Workers' Compensation law and theory continue to evolve through statutory change and judicial decisions. The statutes deal with benefits for work-connected injury and disability. Course material is national in scope with an emphasis on corresponding Ohio cases. The course also touches on related areas of law, such as torts.
LAWS 5769	State Constitutional Law Seminar	1 - 2 Units	This will be a 'national' (i.e., comparative) course on state constitutional law.  The focus will be on individual rights litigation under state constitutions, and it will cover some (though probably not all) of the most important and controversial state constitutional issues (e.g., eugenics, compulsory flag salute, school funding, exclusionary rule, desegregation, marriage equality). There will also be a focus on current issues and current approaches to litigating state constitutional issues. Although the focus will be national and comparative, students interested in writing their papers on Ohio or other one-state topics will be permitted to do so.
LAWS 5770	Cannabis Law	1 - 2 Units	The burgeoning cannabis industry has led to many important issues pertaining to public policy, legal history, constitutional law, criminal law, and jurisprudence, as well as practical legal issues that concern both cannabis-related businesses and individuals, in areas such as banking, employment, tax, bankruptcy, and child custody. The course will provide an overview and/or some in-depth coverage of federal, state, and local laws relating to cannabis regulation, as well as provide insights into the industry itself through guest speakers and other education aids.
LAWS 5775	Social Justice Law Center Reporter	1 - 2 Units	The Social Justice Law Center (SJLC) Reporter course offers students interested in social justice law the opportunity to: 1) explore existing and emerging scholarship, current and proposed laws, and judicial opinions on current social justice issues; 2) write comments and summaries of those various materials; 3) receive guidance and instruction on their writing; and 4) complete their writing requirement focusing on a social justice-related topic(s) through a year-long class. Students work closely with the instructor to identify specific social justice topics to be covered by the Reporter throughout the year. Students will have numerous meetings with the instructor and will develop their critical analysis skills, writing skills, learn about plagiarizing, and will receive training concerning advanced legal research.
LAWS 5781	Climate Law and Policy	3 Units	For well over three decades the scientific community has warned us of the economic and environmental risks posed by continued burning of fossil fuels to the earth's climate.  We are now experiencing the extreme weather events we were warned of decades ago.  The clock is ticking.  This class will explore state and federal energy and climate laws and policies that have been adopted, as well as other legal mechanisms to address climate.  Students will then be asked to design and craft laws and policies they believe should be advanced to address the climate crisis
LAWS 5902	Advanced Contracts	3 Units	We will examine the methodology of law and economics and of deontological approaches to contracts, legal realism, the methodology of default rules, gap filling and incomplete contracts, adjustment of long-terms contracts, employment contracts and the employment at will doctrine, promissory estoppel, relational contracts, incorporation strategies in the U.C.C. and the new formalism in Contracts.
LAWS 5906	African-American Lawyers Seminar	3 Units	This seminar takes an interdisciplinary approach to the study of African-American lawyers.  It examines aspects of the history of black lawyers in America, as well as topics relating to black lawyers in contemporary America.  The course will situate these experiences in the context of both the history of the legal profession and the history of race relations and the struggle for civil rights in the United States.  Students will prepare a substantial research paper and make an oral presentation of their research to the class.  Limited to 12.
LAWS 5908	Public Law Research Seminar	2 Units	This seminar permits students to write a substantial research paper on a topic in Constitutional Law, Civil Rights, Administrative Law, or regulatory law (broadly defined). With permission of the Instructor, the paper may be used to satisfy the JD Writing Requirement.
LAWS 5918	Reproductive Rights	3 Units	This seminar will cover the basics of the Supreme Court's reproductive rights jurisprudence and will look at a series of topics relating to the reproductive rights law and policy, including "partial-birth" abortion and the health exception; minors' access to abortion, contraception, and sex education; reproductive rights and religion; and assisted reproductive technologies. In addition to various interim writing assignments, you will be required to submit a substantial paper by the end of the semester.
LAWS 5919	Scientific Evidence and Advanced Research	2 Units	Students must be concurrently enrolled in Scientific Evidence class (LAWS 5751).  This course allows interested students to pursue additional research and writing within a particular focus area.  With permission of the Instructor, the paper may be used to satisfy the JD Writing Requirement.
LAWS 5925	Wrongful Convictions	2 Units	This course focuses on the causes of wrongful convictions, including eyewitness misidentifications, false confessions, jailhouse informants, scientific fraud, prosecutorial misconduct, and ineffective assistance of defense counsel.  Remedies to prevent the conviction of the innocent are also discussed. Prereq or Coreq: LAWS 4808.
LAWS 5930	Human Trafficking Lab	2 Units	Students will examine and consider legal issues that arise in sex trafficking.  Human trafficking is the second-largest crime in the world and is a $150 billion industry.  Ohio has the fifth largest number of sex-trafficking victims and will serve as a backdrop for the course.  Students will conduct research and craft solutions to issues raised by current gaps in legislation, victims' issues, advocacy groups, and others.  The subject matter will vary from semester to semester based on the issues the class is asked to investigate, but will frequently touch upon criminal, juvenile, human trafficking, municipal, housing, commercial, and other law.  Students will participate in the representation of victims of human trafficking in both the adult and juvenile courts.
LAWS 5931	Human Trafficking Practicum: High Risk Population Identification	3 Units	This course provides a 'hands-on' opportunity to participate in issue-spotting, intake, and legal matter development in populations identified as high-risk for human trafficking.  Students will participate in off-site intake experiences for individuals who are high risk for human trafficking.and assist the instructor with civil-litigation matters handled through the Health & Human Trafficking Law Clinic.  Students will be utilizing their issue-spotting skills by assisting individuals with conducting driver's license abstract and credit report pulls, identifying warrant blocks, consumer law matters, or family law concerns, conducting legal research on a variety of civil matters in a variety of ways.
LAWS 6001	Civil Litigation Clinic	3 Units	In this course, students handle various kinds of civil disputes on behalf of consumers who need legal assistance but cannot afford to pay for a private lawyer.   Students are responsible for all phases of litigation, including the initial client interview and case assessment, preparation of pleadings and motions, conducting discovery, settlement negotiations, and, if necessary, trying the case before a judge or jury.  A weekly two-hour seminar session provides a regular forum for learning the substantive law that applies to the students' caseloads, as well as discussion of the various legal, professional, and ethical issues that arise in the cases.  In addition, after completing required basic mediation training, students act as mediators in small claims and/or landlord-tenant cases in municipal court.   Students must be enrolled in and complete both semesters to receive credit. Prereq or Coreq: LAWS 4808.
LAWS 6002	Civil Litigation Clinic	3 Units	Continuation of LAWS 6001. Both semesters must be completed before credit is given.
LAWS 6011	Community Development Clinic I	3 Units	This is a year-long course; students must complete both semesters of work to receive credit.   Students represent business and non-profit entities in formation of their businesses and to obtain tax exemption for non-profit corporations.  They act as general counsel helping their clients plan for future projects and activities and operate in compliance with law that regulates their activities.  Students may also help to structure tax, real estate and corporate transactions for entities.  Students may have the opportunity to work on simple intellectual property matters including trademark, tradename and copyright registrations, as well as website issues and nondisclosure agreements. This clinic is primarily transactional in nature and is designed to expose students to the special problems encountered in representing entities and in structuring transactions.  Seminar sessions will be devoted to discussions of applicable law pertaining to specific cases students are working on and development of the skills necessary to represent individuals and entities in transactional matters.  Students also will be exposed to the ethical problems associated with entity representation. Prereq or Coreq: LAWS 4401 or LAWS 4402.
LAWS 6012	Community Development Clinic II	3 Units	(See LAWS 6011.)
LAWS 6021	Criminal Justice Clinic I	3 Units	Students handle a limited number of misdemeanor cases in municipal courts throughout Cuyahoga County.  The seminar sessions are devoted to discussions of cases being handled by the students and to ethical and strategic considerations of criminal law practice, trial tactics, and plea bargaining.  Hypothetical case studies are also used to increase the breadth of the students' exposure to the criminal justice system. Each student also handles some prosecution in local court. Prereq or Coreq: LAWS 4807 and LAWS 4808.
LAWS 6022	Second Chance Re-entry Clinic	3 - 12 Units	Students will represent individuals facing legal barriers as the result of their criminal records. The clinic's cases sit at the intersection of the civil and criminal justice systems and tackle issues related to mass incarceration, prisoner reentry, and the collateral consequences of criminal convictions. Students can expect to handle cases in a variety of legal settings including state court and administrative agencies and may participate in policy advocacy.
LAWS 6031	Health Law Clinic I	3 Units	Students represent clients in social security disability claims, adult guardianships, health insurance claims and disputes, access to health care, special education for disabled children, nursing home transfers and discharges, and other health and disability law-related issues.  They investigate complaints in nursing home and represent clients in administrative and court proceedings.  A major part of the student's responsibilities is to analyze the problems and determine the best way of resolving them.  Seminar sessions are primarily devoted to specific skills and to discussions of matters being handled by the students.   The ethical and practical problems encountered in health law practice are emphasized, as well as legal theory.  This is a year-long course; students must be enrolled in and complete both semesters of work to receive credit. Prereq: LAWS 4808 and (LAWS 4200 or LAWS 4201).
LAWS 6032	Human Trafficking Clinic	3 - 12 Units	Students work in interdisciplinary configurations to provide free legal representation and social service referrals to individuals identified as survivors of human trafficking and/or at high risk for trafficking.  General areas of legal representation provided by the Clinic include civil matters such as expungement, debt negotiation, driver's license reinstatement, student loan default negotiation, landlord/tenant issues, asylum and human trafficking visa applications, name changes, and protection orders.
LAWS 6041	Intellectual Property Venture Clinic	3 Units	The IP Venture Clinic will provide students with the opportunity to represent start-up companies and entrepreneurs and focus on intellectual property protection, technology assessment, corporate formation, confidentiality agreements and trade secret protection, material transfer agreements, technology valuation, opportunity analysis, private securities offerings, and technology transactions.  The clinic provides opportunities to work collaboratively with inventors, MBA students, licensing managers, outside counsel, and venture capitalists. Prereq: LAWS 4300 or LAWS 4302.
LAWS 6042	Intellectual Property Venture Clinic II	4 - 12 Units	The IP Venture Clinic will provide students with the opportunity to represent start-up companies and entrepreneurs and focus on intellectual property protection, technology assessment, corporate formation, confidentiality agreements and trade secret protection, material transfer agreements, technology valuation, opportunity analysis, private securities offerings, and technology transactions.  The clinic provides opportunities to work collaboratively with inventors, MBA students, licensing managers, outside counsel, and venture capitalists. Prereq: LAWS 6041.
LAWS 6051	Civil Rights, Human Rights, and Immigration Clinic	4 Units	The Clinic offers students a semester-long opportunity to experience a diverse range of civil rights and human rights litigation and advocacy in both the domestic and international context.  Students will work on cases and projects, often as co-counsel with other lawyers and organizations, addressing constitutional rights and international human rights violations both in the United States and abroad.  Examples of litigation and advocacy may include: -Representing individuals in Sec. 1983 civil rights cases relating to police misconduct, employment discrimination, and other civil rights violations; -Representing non-citizens in the United States unlawfully stopped by local law enforcement for civil immigration violations; -Representing non-citizens in applications for relief from removal or deportation, asylum, withholding of removal, and protection under the Convention Against Torture; -Partnering with foreign non-governmental organizations in South Africa in the research, reporting, and litigation of HIV/AIDS-related discrimination matters; -Working with a national human rights organization on an anti-human trafficking campaign, including providing the legal analysis; -Developing the legal analysis and strategy for ensuring that international sports associations enforce anti-discrimination treaties as applied to the LGBT community; and -Authoring amicus briefs in U.S. and international courts on behalf of selected human rights groups on a range of issues. Prereq: LAWS 4808. Prereq or Coreq: LAWS 5215 or LAWS 5711.
LAWS 6052	Immigration Clinic	4 - 12 Units	Students represent non-citizens before various governmental agencies including US Immigration Court, US Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) and Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE).  Examples of work to be conducted include representing non-citizens in applications for relief from removal or deportation, asylum, withholding of removal, and protection under the Convention Against Torture; assisting clients with applications for Naturalization and/or permanent residency applications; and various other immigration remedies. Prereq: LAWS 6051.
LAWS 6061	First Amendment Clinic	6 Units	Students represent clients in litigation matters focusing on the First Amendment and the public's right to know how their government operates. The focus of the work will be enforcing rights under state and federal freedom of information laws, civil rights litigation involving First Amendment rights (particularly free expression and newsgathering rights), and potentially matters involving First Amendment defenses, such as subpoena defense or defamation defense. Students will gather facts, interview clients, conduct discovery, draft briefs, handle any settlement conferences/discussions, and advocate at hearings and trials. There is heavy emphasis on oral and written advocacy, civil procedure, strategic case planning, and professional conduct. Weekly two-hour seminars will be supplemented by individual meetings with student teams to discuss their case work.
LAWS 6071	Environmental Law Clinic	6 Units	The Environmental Law Clinic will cover the full range of environmental issues but focus predominantly on environmental and energy concerns in Northeast Ohio. Students will represent an array of individuals, community groups, and nonprofits facing environmental and energy issues, and work to remedy those issues through negotiation and/or litigation. The clinic's cases will cover a range of matters including climate and air pollution, energy and utility issues, lead poisoning, and more. The goal of the clinic is to train students for future work in the environmental and energy space, providing a working understanding of litigation at the federal and state levels as well as agency level hearings, while grounding students in movement lawyering. Clinic students will also gain experience in the legislative process and other environmental policy work, to ensure a holistic understanding of the various needs and issues in the environmental and energy space.
LAWS 6099	Advanced Clinic	1 - 5 Units	Advanced Clinic is  for third-year students who have already completed a single semester clinic course and, with relevant clinic faculty approval, seek to continue their clinic work in the following semester, but do not wish to complete an additional six-credit clinic course.
LAWS 6101	Immigration Law Practicum I	3 Units	The immigration Practicum provides an opportunity for students of achieve practical immigration experience by working with real-life situations before the immigration Court and the USCIS.  Students will work on pending matters that may include preparation of legal memoranda or briefs, applications for relief (such as asylum, cancellation of removal, protection under the Violence Against Women, protections of non-citizen victims of domestic violence), and evidentiary submissions for pending cases.  Students are required to attend master (preliminary) and individual hearings, and a pro bono refugee clinic offered with the Catholic Charities or Legal Aid Society.  This is a year-long course. Prereq: LAWS 5733.
LAWS 6103	Basic Mediation Training	1 Unit	This course provides students with basic mediation training. After successful completion, students will be certified, allowing them to serve as volunteer mediators in forums where basic training is required.
LAWS 6107	Pretrial Practice: Civil	2 Units	This course picks up where most first-year legal research and writing courses leave off.  We will examine intensively, among other things, the various discovery devices (including depositions, interrogatories, document requests, and requests to admit), pretrial motion practice, litigation as a means of achieving the best possible negotiated result, and alternative dispute resolution mechanisms (including mediation and arbitration).  In other words, we will study the things that litigators spend most of their time doing and thinking about: how lawyers go about gathering and preserving evidence, the everyday interactions they have with courts, and the reasons they do all these things even though they rarely expect to get all the way to trial.  The course will include simulations and extensive drafting assignments.
LAWS 6108	Pretrial Practice: Criminal	2 Units	This course introduces students to the key activities lawyers undertake in a criminal case in advance of trial. This course examines the various steps leading up to trial, such as the preparation of an indictment, the drafting of discovery requests, motion practice related to discovery and the suppression of evidence, preparation and negotiation of plea agreements, and other motion practice related to the pre-trial phase. This course is designed to expose students to the pretrial phase in a criminal case from the perspective of both the prosecution and defense. Anticipated topics for discussion will include case investigation, the gathering of evidence, pretrial problems typically encountered in a criminal case, and the role sentencing guidelines can have in shaping plea negotiations and other pretrial negotiations. The course will include simulations, drafting assignments, opportunities for mock oral argument, and negotiating exercises. Limited to 12 students.
LAWS 6110	Trial Tactics	4 Units	An intensive course in trial tactics, techniques, and advocacy. The emphasis during the first half of the semester is on practice in the separate components of a trial: direct examination, objections, cross-examination, use of rehabilitative devices, examination of expert witnesses, jury selection, opening statements, closing argument, and pretrial preparation. During the second half of the semester each student acts as co-counsel in a full trial. Videotape recording is used for critiquing student performance throughout the semester. Students may not take both LAWS 6110 and LAWS 395 (Trial Practice). Prereq: LAWS 4808.
LAWS 6111	Appellate Practice	2 Units	This course is designed to teach students the rules and formalities of appellate practice and help students develop the skills necessary to write an effective appellate brief and present a persuasive oral argument. During the first semester students research and write an appellate brief and engage in short in-class oral arguments. During the second semester students receive instruction on the organization and presentation of longer oral arguments, engage in a practice oral round and receive an individualized critique of their performance. They complete the course by competing in the Dunmore Moot Court Tournament, which culminates in a final round oral argument before sitting judges in the spring.
LAWS 6113	Deposition Skills	1 Unit	Student will learn, through group lectures and simulations, how to prepare for, take, and defend a deposition in a civil litigation case. Students will attend lectures presented by experienced civil litigation attorneys. Students will then practice the skills discussed in the lectures by taking and defending depositions that will be critiques by the course instructor and other experienced civil litigation attorneys.
LAWS 6160	Appellate Litigation Clinic	6 Units	Students will represent clients in all phases of the appellate process in civil and criminal cases in both Ohio and federal courts.  Students will interview clients, pursue any necessary post-judgement relief in the trial court, prepare the paperwork to initiate the appeal, ensure the completeness of the record, handle any settlement conferences/discussions, draft the appellate briefs, and conduct oral arguments.  There is heavy emphasis on oral and written advocacy, appellate procedure, strategic case planning, and professional conduct.  Weekly two-hour seminars will be supplemented by individual meetings with student teams to discuss their case work.
LAWS 6501	Canada - United States Law Journal	0 - 2 Units	Students enrolled in this non-credit course will serve as writers and editors for the annually published Canada - U.S. Law Journal.
LAWS 6502	International Law Journal	1 - 18 Units	
LAWS 6503	Health Matrix Seminar	2 Units	Students write their Health Matrix notes through the year-long Health Matrix Seminar.  Students work closely with the instructor to develop their topics, outlines, several drafts, and final notes.  The course will include multiple individual meetings with the professor, extensive feedback, and oral presentations of the papers.  Students will develop their writing and oral presentation skills and will receive training concerning advanced legal research, plagiarism, and statutory interpretation. 2L associates also will have responsibilities for journal production work, such as verifying footnotes.
LAWS 6504	Law Review Seminar	2 Units	The seminar will provide training in writing, editorial skills, and advanced legal research for students writing notes for the Case Western Reserve Law Review. Topics to be covered include plagiarism, selecting a topic, web-based research, advanced Lexis and Westlaw research, advanced research training in selected substantive areas, and writing techniques. Satisfactory completion of the note will satisfy the upper-level writing requirement. Grade based on the quality of the note and class participation.
LAWS 6505	Law, Technology and Internet Journal	0 - 3 Units	The Journal of Law, Technology and the Internet Seminar offers students interested in technology and intellectual property the opportunity to write their notes through a year-long seminar.  Students work closely with the instructor to develop their topics, thesis, outlines, and final note.  Students will have numerous individual meetings with the professor and extensive feedback of the papers.  Students will develop their writing skills, learn about plagiarizing, and will receive training concerning advanced legal research. 2L associates will be trained for journal production work such as verifying citations.  The course will also include 3-4 whole group meetings through the quarter.  Second year students will also be responsible for performing an in-depth evaluation of the article accepted through the peer-review process.  2L editors will ensure that submitted articles have not been preempted by any article already in print.  Once an article has been approved by the Faculty Peer-Reviewers, 2L editors will be given portions of the article for which they are responsible for verifying all citations, and performing textual edits required to bring the article into compliance with Journal policies.
LAWS 6512	Int'l Law Journal Board	2 Units	
LAWS 6513	Health Matrix	2 Units	
LAWS 6514	Law Review Editorial Board	2 Units	
LAWS 6550	Mock Trial	2 Units	
LAWS 6560	Moot Court Team	2 Units	
LAWS 6561	Jessup Moot Court Team Mngr	2 Units	
LAWS 6562	Moot Court Brief Advisors	2 Units	
LAWS 6600	Supervised Research Seminar	1 - 3 Units	Second- and third-year students may earn graded credit for an individual research project of scholarly depth and scope, under the close supervision of a faculty member. Approval of the faculty supervisor is required before registration. No student may undertake more than two Supervised Research projects or earn more than a total of four hours of Supervised Research credit. No student may work on more than one Supervised Research project in one semester.  May satisfy the writing requirement.
LAWS 6701	Legal Writing Fellows	1 Unit	CaseArc Honors Fellows serve for either one semester of the full year as teaching assistants in the CaseArc program.  With training, guidance, and under the supervision of the CaseArc faculty, the Honors Fellows work closely in small groups or one-on-one with students on their writing projects, in-class exercises and preparation for simulations.  In addition to meeting regularly with students, Honors Fellows may participate for simulations, judge oral arguments and assist with research training.  Overall, the Honors Fellows serve as mentors to their assigned students to help them make the most of the CaseArc courses and the law school experience in general.
LAWS 6705	Curricular Training: Law Field Research	0 Unit	This course is intended exclusively for the foreign national J.D. or LL.M. law student who wishes to gain applied legal experience based on their intended career path with an organization that offers course credit for internship experience. These internships may be either paid or unpaid. This course will provide a means for the student to build required skills and bridge the gap between the classroom and real world application. The student is encouraged to explore and discover additional avenues to assist in the management and advancement of his/her career. Does not count toward J.D. credit.
LAWS 7035	International Law Externship	12 Units	This program provides opportunity for students to participate in a semester long externship program arranged through the Cox International Law Center.
LAWS 7045	Federal Judicial Externship	4 Units	Students in the spring of their first year are selected for summer externships with specific federal district and circuit judges. Meetings with the externship supervisor at CWRU will complement the eight weeks of externing in the judge's chamber.
LAWS 7110	Legal Externship I	2 - 4 Units	The externship program allows for an upper-level law student to be engaged in an experiential learning process by working alongside practitioners in a variety of legal settings.  The students work is supervised by both an on-site coordinator, and a law school faculty member.  All externship participation must be coordinated and approved in advance by the school's externship coordinator.
LAWS 7120	Legal Externship II	2 - 4 Units	The externship program allows for an upper-level law student to be in engaged in an experiential learning process by working alongside practitioners in a variety of legal settings.  The students work is supervised by both an on-site coordinator, and a law school faculty member.  All externship participation must be coordinated and approved in advance by the school's externship coordinator.
LAWS 7130	Legal Externship III	2 - 4 Units	The externship program allows for an upper-level law student to be engaged in an experiential learning process by working alongside practitioners in a variety of legal settings.  The students work is supervised by both an on-site coordinator, and a law school faculty member.  All externship participation must be coordinated and approved in advance by the school's externship coordinator.
LAWS 7200C	Capstone Externship	1 - 12 Units	This is an experiential learning conducted in an off-campus site, with the student participating in a full-time, semester-long legal trainee experience.  Specific experiences will vary depending on the site of the externship.  Students are given extensive mentoring and supervision with an on-site supervisor and a CWRU faculty supervisor.
LAWS 7510	SJD Thesis	1 - 10 Units	Students in the SJD program will develop and write a substantial research paper as part of the requirements for conferral of the degree.  The topic and scope of the paper will be developed jointly by the student and the student's program advisor.  Students will meet periodically as a group with the Director of Foreign Graduate Studies to discuss their research and to present their research to each other and as part of a faculty workshop.
LAWS 7511	Thesis M.A.	2 - 4 Units	Each student will research a problem or issue and will develop and write a substantial paper on the problem or issue.  The topic and scope of the paper will be developed jointly by the student and the Director and students will be assigned a capstone advisor.  Students are also required to make a final presentation of their capstone paper.
NURS 115	Foundations of Nursing Practice I	4 Units	This course is designed to introduce the student to the practice, profession, and discipline of nursing. Critical historical influences on the development of the profession will be discussed.  The relationship between evidence, theory, and nursing care will be explored. Contemporary nursing will be examined with a focus on patient safety, interdisciplinary care, and innovative strategies to attain optimum health. The basic components of the nursing process will be presented as a framework for beginning clinical practice.
NURS 122	Foundations of Nursing Practice II	3 Units	This course will build on concepts essential to nursing practice presented in Foundations of Nursing Practice I. It will focus on strategies, skills, and techniques to obtain a comprehensive individual health history, family health history, and physical examination.  Therapeutic nursing interventions based on assessment and scientific knowledge will be performed Prereq: (BIOL 114 with a grade of C or better or a score of 4 or higher on the Biology AP exam), BIOL 116 with a grade of C or better, and NURS 115 with a grade of C or better.
NURS 160	Health Care in the Community	1 Unit	This course will integrate social disparities in healthcare outcomes with the delivery of culturally appropriate, community-based healthcare interventions.  Students will engage in a community clinical experience in a community-based facility.  Population health, public health nursing, and community assessment will be emphasized.
NURS 201	Applied Nutrition in Health and Disease	2 Units	This course will build upon the student's previous knowledge base regarding human physiology and metabolism. Nutrients and their function, food sources, and requirements will be highlighted as well as changes related to different stages in the lifespan. Prereq: (BIOL 114 with a grade of C or better or a score of 4 or higher on the Biology AP exam) and BIOL 116 with a grade of C or better.
NURS 210	Teaching/Learning in the Community	1 Unit	This course will expand on foundational public health nursing concepts to develop student knowledge, skills, and attitudes in providing culturally appropriate health care education to diverse populations. This course will explore the syndemic relationships between learning needs, health literacy, teaching/learning interventions, and evaluation of learning. Students will engage in classroom and experiential teaching/learning encounters. Prereq: NURS 160.
NURS 211	Introduction to Pharmacology I	1.5 Unit	This is the first of two courses which will introduce the basic principles of pharmacology and pharmacotherapeutics, including a review of the characteristics and use of major drug classifications with an emphasis on nursing implications. The pharmacological content presented in this course will be coordinated with Nursing Care of the Adult 1 with emphasis focused on patients experiencing co-morbid conditions. Prereq: BIOL 117, CHEM 119, and NURS 122.  Coreq: NURS 230.
NURS 212	Introduction to Pharmacology II	1.5 Unit	This is the second of two courses which will introduce the basic principles of pharmacology and pharmacotherapeutics, including a review of the characteristics and use of major drug classifications with an emphasis on nursing implications. The pharmacological content in this course will be coordinated with Nursing Care of the Adult 2 with emphasis focused on patients experiencing co-morbid conditions. Prereq: NURS 211 and NURS 230. Coreq: NURS 240 and NURS 317.
NURS 230	Nursing Care of the Adult I	5 Units	This is the first of two courses that will focus on the application of the nursing process to adults experiencing common acute and chronic health alterations.  Special emphasis will be placed on patient assessment, diagnostic testing, and medication teaching and administration. The concept of transition from inpatient to primary care will be discussed. Prereq: BIOL 117, CHEM 119, and NURS 122. Coreq: NURS 211.
NURS 240	Nursing Care of the Adult II	4.75 Units	This course will build upon the knowledge and skills mastered in NURS 230.  Students will collaborate with members of the health care team to plan, implement, and evaluate nursing interventions and provide comprehensive care. Primary and transitional care planning will be emphasized for the adult with chronic health issues and comorbid conditions. Prereq: CHEM 121, NURS 211, and NURS 230. Coreq: NURS 212.
NURS 250	Aging in Health and Illness	2 Units	This course will explore the concept of aging as a healthy developmental process with a particular focus on older adults as active, independent and contributing members of the community. Content will include the process of  healthy aging, major health problems  for which older adults are at risk, and policy issues. Prereq: BIOL 117, CHEM 119, NURS 122. Coreq: NURS 211.
NURS 260	Evidence Based Public Policy in the Community	1 Unit	This course will expand on foundational public health nursing concepts to develop student knowledge, skills, and attitudes in providing culturally appropriate health care interventions to diverse populations. Focusing on evidence-based knowledge and skills, students will apply concepts of teamwork and collaboration while participating in a public policy health promotion initiative.
NURS 277	BCLS and First Aid for Health Care Providers	0 Unit	Designed for healthcare professional students, this course follows the American Heart Association Basic Life Support (BLS) for Healthcare Providers Course objectives. It provides a variety of healthcare professional students the ability to recognize several life-threatening emergencies, provide CPR, use an AED, and relieve choking in a safe, timely and effective manner. Basic first aid skills are also included in this course.
NURS 310	Leadership in the Community	1 Unit	This course will expand on foundational public health nursing concepts to develop student knowledge, leadership skills and attitudes in providing culturally appropriate health care. Students will explore nursing's role as a community health advocate and leader. Students will apply team leadership concepts while participating in a public policy health promotion initiative utilizing a balance between knowledge-centered and skill-centered approaches.
NURS 315	Parents and Neonates in Health and Illness	4.5 Units	This course will examine childbearing families and their health seeking behaviors from a developmental perspective. Content will include nursing knowledge and skills related to assessment of health status of parents and neonates. Nursing strategies will focus on interventions to promote, restore, and maintain health. Prereq: NURS 240, NURS 317, NURS 342, and SOCI 203.
NURS 316	Child Health Nursing	4.5 Units	This course will build on knowledge and skills acquired in previous adult courses to tailor nursing care to infants, children, adolescents, and their families.   Students will apply the nursing process within the context of the child/family's culture and community and will examine acute and chronic conditions along with health promotion and maintenance. Growth and development, communication, evidence-based practice, interprofessional collaboration, quality, and safety will be emphasized. Prereq: NURS 212, NURS 240, NURS 317, NURS 342, and SOCI 203. Coreq: NURS 315.
NURS 317	Psychiatric-Mental Health Nursing	3.75 Units	This course will address psychiatric and mental health nursing concepts, focusing on patients with acute and chronic psychiatric disorders and their mental health. Students will discuss and practice nursing strategies that promote mental health which are appropriate for assessment and intervention throughout the lifespan. Prereq: NURS 211 and NURS 230. Coreq: NURS 212.
NURS 320	Theoretical and Evidence Bases for Best Practice in Nursing	3 Units	This course will explore the theoretical and evidence bases for best practices in nursing.   Theoretical underpinnings of nursing practice and nursing science, research design and methods, evidence-based practice, and the process of evaluation of the evidence supporting practice will be discussed.  Additionally, the course will introduce students to quality improvement and implementation science to integrate evidence into practice. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: STAT 201.
NURS 338	Care of the Adult with Complex Health Conditions	4.5 Units	This course will provide the student with the knowledge and skills to care for complex, acutely ill adult patients who present with co-morbid conditions who may be supported by medical devices and technologies.  This complexity encompasses the physical, psychological, social, spiritual, and ethical domains of care and includes both the patient and the family. Prereq: NURS 212, NURS 240, NURS 342 and NURS 317. Coreq: NURS 339.
NURS 339	Care of the Perioperative Patient	3.5 Units	This course will provide the student with a dynamic learning experience in a perioperative interprofessional environment to enhance the knowledge, cognitive and psychomotor skills to care for patients undergoing operative or invasive procedures. Course didactic, lab, and clinical components will be guided by The Quality and Safety Education for Nurses (QSEN) competencies.  The Perioperative Patient-Focused Model (Association of periOperative Registered Nurses) will be introduced. Communication skills, advocacy and leadership will be emphasized in the context of nursing care within and outside of the perioperative environment. Prereq: NURS 212, NURS 240, NURS 317 and NURS 342. Coreq: NURS 338.
NURS 341	Concepts of Leadership and Management in Nursing Practice	3 Units	This course will focus on basic concepts related to leadership and management in the provision of nursing care.  Students will examine management processes, leadership theory, and related competencies for individual clinical practice. An emphasis will be placed on professionalism, professional identity, equity, inclusion in care, and emotional intelligence. Internal environmental factors and external influences that impact nursing management will be analyzed. Prereq: NURS 315, NURS 316, NURS 338, NURS 339.
NURS 342	Medical Microbiology, Immunity, and Infectious Disease	4 Units	This course will provide the foundation of general microbiology necessary for students who are enrolled in nursing. This course will introduce the core concepts and basic principles in microbiology, examining microorganisms and how they interact with humans and the environment. Information regarding classification of microorganisms, characteristics of different cell types and processes critical for cell survival will be presented. Topics such as bacterial metabolism, microbial nutrition, genetics, anti-microbial approaches and interaction of pathogenic bacteria with humans will be discussed. The course will include a laboratory component designed to complement lecture topics. Prereq: BIOL 117 and CHEM 121.
NURS 343	Ethics in Nursing and Health Care	2 Units	This course will introduce students to ethical issues in nursing and healthcare. Fundamental ethical theories and decision-making frameworks will be applied to ethical dilemmas common to modern health care in a morally pluralistic society. Students will examine the role of ethics in professional nursing practice. Prereq: NURS 315, NURS 316, NURS 338, and NURS 339.
NURS 345	Nursing Informatics II	2 Units	This course builds on information learned in NURS 120, and focuses on the use of informatics in nursing practice, education, and research.  The emphasis is on using informatics to solve clinical problems.  The course addresses how nursing informatics has evolved as a discipline and explores career options in nursing informatics.  Current policy and legislative influences on health care technology are also addressed. Prereq: NURS 120.
NURS 360	Process Change in the Community	1 Unit	This course expands on the foundational public health nursing concepts to develop student knowledge, skills, and attitudes in providing culturally appropriate health care.  By analyzing key components that influence health and wellness, students will explore nursing's role as a community health advocate and educator in the promotion of health and health behaviors.
NURS 370	Information Technologies in Health	1 Unit	This course will focus on the application of advanced information technologies in the health care of patients, communities, and populations. Building on clinical experiences, the course will explore contemporary issues in health information technologies and ways in which nurses can assess data and utilize information technology to support delivery of care.
NURS 371	Population Health Nursing	3 Units	In this course, students will develop knowledge and competencies in applying key concepts of population-based health, including public health nursing, social determinants of health, and epidemiology to care for individuals, families, communities, and populations.  Through classroom experiences, students will discover strategies to assess, plan, implement, and evaluate population-focused programs. Prereq: NURS 310 and NURS 360.
NURS 372	Health in the Global Community	3 Units	This course will focus on an analysis of the forces shaping community and global health patterns. Drawing on multidisciplinary sources, this course will explore the impact of these global processes as they manifest in the health of our own and other societies.  Emphasis will be placed on analysis of the broad cultural, environmental, socio-economic, and political systems that contribute to health status and outcomes, health policies and health care delivery around the world.
NURS 373	Population Health Practicum	5 Units	This practicum will provide students with the opportunity to analyze the concepts of population health, healthcare quality, health policy, systems-based practice, culture, and ethics through a community-based immersion experience. Students will apply epidemiological methods, community assessment, leadership, teamwork, collaboration, partnership building, and evidence-based nursing practice to identify and analyze a population health concern leading to the development of an intervention. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: NURS 315, NURS 316, NURS 338, NURS 339. Coreq: NURS 371 and NURS 372.
NURS 380	Transition to Practice	8 Units	This course will prepare students to transition to professional nursing practice by integrating principles of communication, collaboration, and clinical decision making necessary to provide safe, quality nursing care for patients and their families with complex issues of health and illness.  Emphasis will be placed on clinical practice and nursing strategies designed to provide comprehensive, patient-centered care for select populations. Prereq: NURS 315, NURS 316, NURS 338 and NURS 339.
NURS 394	Global Health Seminar	3 Units	The focus of this course is the issues and trends in global health from both a nursing and a trans-disciplinary perspective.  The course covers how international social, political, economic, environmental, and cultural issues affect health and health care.  Particular emphasis is placed on nursing's contribution to global health issues and outcomes. Offered as: NURS 394 and NURS 494.
NURS 395	Global Health and Culture in Diverse Populations	3 Units	This elective course will use didactic and experiential learning, including travel abroad, to expose students to health care and population health in other countries. The focus of the course will be on issues and trends in global health from a trans-disciplinary perspective. International historical, social, economic, environmental, and cultural issues affecting health and health care will be examined. (Junior or graduate status required). Offered as NURS 395 and NURS 495.
NURS 399	Independent Study	1 - 12 Units	Independent guided study for undergraduate students with special interests and/or curricular needs. The course may include didactic, lab and/or clinical experiences. Faculty consent required to register.
NURS 400	Guided Study in Nursing	1 - 12 Units	Independent guided study for students with special interests and/or curricular needs. May include didactic, lab, and/or clinical. Separate guided study plan form required. Faculty consent required to register.
NURS 401	Human Growth and Development through the Lifespan	3 Units	This course will provide an overview of major concepts, theories and research related to human growth and development from birth to death. An emphasis will be placed on providing culturally appropriate care to all, respecting the diversity and breadth of the human experience.
NURS 404	Emergent Care of the Child	2 Units	This course provides an introduction to the care of the child requiring critical care transport (CCT).  This course examines pathophysiology, assessment, diagnostic approaches, and interventions specific to emergent care of infants, children and adolescents by advanced nursing practice in CCT. Prereq: NURS 406.
NURS 405	Inquiry I - Theoretical Foundations	2 Units	This course provides an introduction to conceptual and theoretical thinking.  Students will examine knowledge development in nursing, conceptual structures, and their uses as a basis for nursing practice and research.
NURS 406	Flight Nursing Seminar I	1 Unit	This course introduces the knowledge and skill set for advanced nursing practice in critical care transport.  The unique features of delivering care in the critical care transport environment are emphasized.
NURS 407	Critical Care Transport and Advanced Nursing Practice 2	1 Unit	This course further develops the knowledge and skill set of advanced nursing practice to deliver care to  individuals and groups of patients with critical illness. Emphasis is placed on diagnostic reasoning and patient management in unstructured environments. Prereq: NURS 406.
NURS 412	Practice Change Implementation	1 Unit	The course will focus on evidence-based practice implementation and quality improvement methods to facilitate effective management of practice change. Students will define quality and safety problems in the healthcare system in which they work and then implement a change. The course will cover issues related to evidence-based practice, teamwork, systems science, change management, design thinking, and data analytics. Students will apply the concepts to practice through an implementation/quality improvement project. This course requires permission of faculty.  Students will complete a minimum of 30 practicum hours during the course.
NURS 415	Introduction to Childbirth	1 Unit	This course will provide an overview of the process of physiologic labor and birth and methods to facilitate normal processes and minimize interventions.  Anatomical and physiologic factors of labor and birth will be explored in detail.  The psychological, social, and cultural influences on labor will be examined.  Preparation for childbirth by the woman and her family will be explored.  The influences of family and health care providers during the labor and birth process will be analyzed.
NURS 416	Integrated Assessment of the Neonate for Midwives	1 Unit	This course will introduce concepts fundamental to the integrated assessment of the neonate. Skills in physical, behavioral, and gestational age assessment will be developed. The course will provide the basis for identification of deviations from normal and consultation and/or referral to appropriate health services as indicated. Coreq: NURS 457.
NURS 420	History of Advanced Practice Nursing	1 Unit	This course will provide an overview of the history of advanced practice nursing in the United States.  The social, political, and economic factors driving the establishment of advanced practice nursing will be explored.  Students will have an opportunity to thoroughly explore the history and evolution of a particular advanced practice nursing role.
NURS 425	Inquiry II - Research Process	3 Units	This course emphasizes scholarly inquiry, scientific integrity and scientific investigation.  It includes study of the research process, particularly design, sampling, data collection and analysis, and interpretation and reporting of findings. Prereq: NURS 405.
NURS 430	Advanced Pharmacology	3 Units	This course focuses on the application of advanced pharmacology and pharmacotherapeutics for common conditions across the lifespan.  Principles of pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and pharmacogenomics are applied. Pharmacotherapeutic decision points congruent with effective prescribing are emphasized, including integrating the ethical, legal and cost-benefits of pharmacological interventions. This course is designed to build on diagnostic reasoning and prior pharmacology study of actions and effects of drugs on the human system.  RN licensure and practice recommended Prereq: Enrolled in MSN, DNP or PhD Nursing program.
NURS 431	Psychosocial and Spiritual Dimensions of Advanced Nursing Practice	2 Units	This course will focus on psychosocial and spiritual dimensions of care. Focused interviewing, counseling, and coaching skills will be examined.  Skills in assessing spirituality depression, psychological distress, suicide risk, and substance use issues will be addressed.
NURS 444A	Ethical Issues in Advanced Nursing Practice	1 Unit	The focus of this course is ethical decision-making for advanced nursing practice. The interaction between the health care delivery system and ethical decision making is explored. The role of the nurse in identifying and addressing ethical dilemmas and applying communication strategies in assisting patients and families and the interdisciplinary team is emphasized.
NURS 444B	Health Care Delivery and Finance in Advanced Practice	1 Unit	The focus of this course is the study of the financial and business factors related to health care delivery and advanced practice nursing.  Students will discuss strategies related to business practices, coding, billing, and reimbursement.
NURS 444C	Health Policy Legislation and Legal Issues in Advanced Practice	1 Unit	The focus of this course is the critical analysis of health policy and legal issues. Strategies for influencing health policy will be explored.
NURS 451	Leadership for Quality Healthcare within Organizations and Systems	3 Units	This course will prepare the student to take a leadership role within organizations and systems to improve the quality of health care.  Theory-based strategies to promote change within organizations and systems will be examined. The influence of structural and contextual factors on health, current and emerging information technologies, and communication patterns influencing outcomes of care will be explored.
NURS 453	Advanced Pathophysiology	4 Units	This course focuses on the biologic alterations produced by injury or disease among individuals across the lifespan. Physiologic and pathophysiologic concepts that contribute to an individual's capacity for health and susceptibility to illness are examined. Prereq: Enrolled in Master of Science in Nursing Program.
NURS 453A	Advanced Physiology & Pathophysiology I	2 Units	This course will focus on physiologic function and pathophysiologic alterations produced by injury or disease among individuals across the lifespan. Physiologic and pathophysiologic concepts that contribute to an individual's capacity for health and susceptibility to illness will be examined. This will be the first of a two-course series focusing on advanced physiology and pathophysiology. This course will include an examination of cellular and tissue physiology, genetics, immunology, cancer biology, and neurologic systems. (Enrollment in MSN, DNP or PhD in Nursing Program)
NURS 453B	Advanced Physiology & Pathophysiology II	3 Units	This course will focus on the physiologic function and pathophysiologic alterations produced by injury or disease among individuals across the lifespan. Physiologic and pathophysiologic concepts that contribute to an individual's capacity for health and susceptibility to illness will be examined. This will be the second of a two-course series focusing on physiology and pathophysiology. This course will include an examination of cardiovascular, pulmonary, hematologic, endocrine, renal, gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal, and reproductive systems. (Enrollment in MSN, DNP or PhD in Nursing Program) Prereq: NURS 453A.
NURS 454	Gynecologic, Reproductive, and Sexual Health Care	3 Units	In this course, students will learn to assess and manage common gynecologic, reproductive, and sexual health issues encountered by adolescents and adults in ambulatory settings. Comprehensive care for all available contraceptive methods will beaddressed. Cultural safety will be integrated throughout the clinical experience. Supervised clinical experience will focus on achieving the foundation for beginning practice, anticipating and identifying complications and participating in consultations, referrals and collaborative management. This course does not address antepartum, intrapartum, or postpartum care. Prereq: NURS 459. Coreq: NURS 453.
NURS 455	The Childbearing Family	4 Units	In this course, students will learn to assess and manage common perinatal issues in ambulatory settings.  Comprehensive care including physical, psychological, and cultural safety will be integrated throughout the clinical experience. Supervised clinical experience will focus on common aspects of pregnancy, prevention of problems, promotion of health behaviors, and participation in consultations, referrals, and collaborative management. Prereq: NURS 453 and NURS 454. Coreq: NURS 430.
NURS 457	Labor and Birth	5 Units	In this course, students will learn to assess and manage common intrapartum and immediate postpartum issues encountered by a diverse population in inpatient settings. Facilitating the process of physiologic labor and birth and providing physical, psychological, emotional, spiritual, and social support will be emphasized. Cultural safety will be integrated throughout the clinical experience. Supervised clinical experience will include anticipating and identifying complications, including emergency situations, and participating in consultations, referrals, and collaborative management. Prereq: NURS 559.
NURS 459	Advanced Health Assessment	3 Units	This course focuses on advanced assessment of individuals across the lifespan.  This course incorporates communication skills, interpretation of data, and diagnostic reasoning. Prereq: Enrolled in Master of Science in Nursing Program.
NURS 464	Global Clinical Learning	1 Unit	This course will allow the MSN student to engage in clinical work in low and middle income medically under resourced communities providing direct patient care under clinical supervision of MSN faculty. Students will prepare for the experience by gaining knowledge of the history and culture of the region, common diseases prevalent in the area and orientation to the site operations.  The student will focus on the 1) steps to diagnose, treat and implement a plan of care for area specific diseases; 2) culturally and resource appropriate treatments; 3) dental hygiene and nutrition as they impact the health of the local population. Students will prepare culturally appropriate presentations for local nurses and contribute to the preparation of non-medical members of the team for patient safety using current evidence based practices. Offered as NUNP 464 and NURS 464. Prereq: Enrollment in MSN, DNP or PhD in Nursing Program.
NURS 465	Psychopharmacology	2 Units	Course content will focus on drug categories commonly used to treat psychiatric disorders and clinical implications for the patient and family. Substance use disorder/Alcohol use disorder and application of detoxification protocols will be described. Pain management and current APRN practice in prescribing will be discussed.
NURS 466	Promoting Health Across Boundaries	3 Units	This course examines the concepts of health and boundary spanning and how the synergy of the two can produce new, effective approaches to promoting health. Students will explore and analyze examples of individuals and organizations boundary spanning for health to identify practice features affecting health, compare and contrast practices and approaches, and evaluate features and context that promote or inhibit boundary spanning and promoting health. Offered as MPHP 466, PQHS 466, SOCI 466, NURS 466 and BETH 466. Prereq: Graduate student status or instructor consent.
NURS 468	The Continual Improvement of Healthcare: An Interdisciplinary Course	3 Units	This course prepares students to be members of interprofessional teams to engage in the continual improvement in health care.  The focus is on working together for the benefit of patients and communities to enhance quality and safety. Offered as PQHS 468, MPHP 468, and NURS 468.
NURS 473	Advanced Psychopathology Across the Lifespan: Part I (Infant through Young Adult)	2 Units	The course will focus on the assessment and diagnosis of psychopathology in children of all ages, infants through young adults. Behavioral deviations from normal growth and development will be assessed while considering age, social, cultural, and economic differences. The responses of family members to psychopathology, violence and substance use in this age group will be discussed.
NURS 474	Advanced Psychopathology Across the Lifespan Part II (Adult and Older Adult)	2 Units	This course will focus on the assessment and diagnosis of psychopathology in adults and older adults. Behavioral /cognitive deviations from normal growth and development will be evaluated while considering socio-cultural differences and age-appropriate behavior.  Responses of family members in relation to adults or older adults' psychopathology, violence and substance use will be discussed. Prereq: NURS 473.
NURS 475	General Systems Theory	Foundations for Practice	2 Units	This foundational seminar will introduce General Systems Theory as a framework for understanding complex entities comprised of component parts that are in constant and mutual interaction. The concepts covered will emphasize the openness and flexibility of a system by attending to its entirety as opposed to focusing on separate parts. The focus will be  on the organizational structure and processes controlled  through cybernetics   that allow system adaptation and transformation. Students will apply General Systems Theory to address the mental health care needs of stigmatized, at risk and vulnerable populations informed by their disciplinary perspectives. Graduate standing in nursing or permission of Instructor.
NURS 476	Advanced Practice Seminar: Role of Psychiatric-Mental Health APRN	1 Unit	Students will explore the role of the Psychiatric Mental Health (PMH) Nurse Practitioner and Psychiatric Mental Health Clinical Nurse Specialist within the context of family and community. The course will focus on boundaries, professional development and the scope of practice within these roles. Students will examine ethical, legal, cultural and professional standards as they relate to micro and macro systems. (Admission to Family Systems Psychiatric Mental Health Nursing Program required.)
NURS 481	Family Systems Theoretical Foundations	2 Units	This course will focus on the major contemporary theoretical approaches and therapies for conceptualizing and working with families across the lifespan. Attention will be given to families challenged by situations such as stress, trauma, violence, psychiatric disorders, and substance use. Prereq: NURS 453 and NURS 473 and NURS 475 and NURS 476.
NURS 482	Family Systems Integration and Application	1 Unit	This practicum experience in the application of family theory will address the professional encounter between the advanced practice registered nurse (APRN) and the family system with attention to health promotion and psychiatric disorder management. Special consideration will be given to policy, legal, cultural, and ethical issues regarding family care and practice. Group supervision of the practicum experience is an expectation. (NOTE: Admission to the Family Systems Psychiatric Mental Health NP major is required.) Prereq: NURS 453 and NURS 473 and NURS 475 and NURS 476. Coreq: NURS 430 and NURS 474 and NURS 481.
NURS 484	Individual and Group Modalities for Family Systems Practice Across the Lifespan	3 Units	This seminar will address therapeutic modalities as applied to families across the lifespan. Brief, individual, and group modalities will be studied in the context of Family Systems Theory with a focus on differences in family constellations and developmental stages. The selection of modalities for families will consider the implications of cultural and gender differences, vulnerable populations, and the stigma of psychiatric illness. Prereq: NURS 430 and NURS 481 and NURS 482.
NURS 485	Practicum and Supervision: Family Systems Practice Across the Lifespan	2 Units	This practicum experience will involve the professional encounter between the individual, group members, and psychiatric nurse practitioner students within the context of family systems theory. Nursing strategies and concepts from psychiatry, behavioral and social sciences related to the promotion of mental health and biopsychosocial treatment in individual and group members across the life span will be explored. Attention will be given to situations such as stress, loneliness, trauma, violence, and substance abuse. Group supervision of the practicum experience is an expectation. Prereq: NURS 430 and NURS 481 and NURS 482. Coreq: NURS 484.
NURS 486	Modalities for Family Systems Practice: Vulnerable Family Populations	3 Units	Students will explore the special needs of families who are currently at risk for or manifesting mental health and substance use disorders within the context of family and community in urban and rural settings. Vulnerable families including those who have been exposed to acute and chronic stress disasters, military-related and other forms of trauma will be studied. The needs of youth and adults who are incarcerated will be addressed. Students will encounter the diverse nature of family relationships, including blended, migrant, and immigrant families; relationships that are defined by choice; and families residing on reservations and in religious enclaves. A variety of treatment modalities will be discussed. Prereq: NURS 482 and NURS 485.
NURS 488	Theoretical Basis of Practicum and Supervision in Consult, Collaborate, and Mental Health Education	3 Units	This course will focus on the professional encounter among  the psych mental health  advanced practice registered nurse (APRN)  and patient,  families and communities within the context of an environment of care. The nurse consultant e applies general systems and family systems theory to enhance the capacity of patients and families to learn, adapt and develop through mutual interaction and cybernetic processes. The roles of the psychiatric mental health APRN, educator, researcher, administrator and therapist are explored. The theories and processes of consultation, collaboration and adult education are discussed relative to mental health and community education. Prereq: NURS 484 and NURS 485. Coreq: NURS 489.
NURS 489	Practicum and Supervision in the Role of Family Systems Psychiatric Mental Health Advanced Practice	3 Units	This practicum course will emphasize the professional encounter between the psychiatric mental health (PMH) advanced practice registered nurse (APRN), families, organizations, communities and agency personnel providing mental health services.  Systems variables that influence the learning, adaptation and development of families, organizations and systems will be emphasized. Billing and coding for the PMH APRN will be integrated into the course. The PMH APRN student functions as a change agent in direct and indirect care through the role of practitioner, educator, consultant, planner, evaluator and researcher. Prereq: NURS 484 and NURS 485. Coreq: NURS 488.
NURS 494	Global Health Seminar	3 Units	The focus of this course is the issues and trends in global health from both a nursing and a trans-disciplinary perspective.  The course covers how international social, political, economic, environmental, and cultural issues affect health and health care.  Particular emphasis is placed on nursing's contribution to global health issues and outcomes. Offered as: NURS 394 and NURS 494.
NURS 495	Global Health and Culture in Diverse Populations	3 Units	This elective course will use didactic and experiential learning, including travel abroad, to expose students to health care and population health in other countries. The focus of the course will be on issues and trends in global health from a trans-disciplinary perspective. International historical, social, economic, environmental, and cultural issues affecting health and health care will be examined. (Junior or graduate status required). Offered as NURS 395 and NURS 495.
NURS 502	Inquiry III Evidence-Based Practice	2 Units	This course will focus on linking research evidence to practice. Processes for appraisal and implementation of evidence-based practice will be included. Prereq: NURS 425 or Requisites Not Met permission.
NURS 503	Inquiry Practicum	1 - 2 Units	This course focuses on the development of competencies in scientific inquiry.  Such competencies are achieved through participation in a research study or evidence-based project related to nursing science with dissemination of the experience. Prereq or Coreq: NURS 502.
NURS 504	Nursing Knowledge Development	3 Units	This course involves two critical issues for knowledge development for the discipline of nursing.  First, epistemology is the study of knowledge shared among members of the discipline, the patterns of knowing and knowledge development, and criteria for evaluating knowledge claims and philosophy of science. The epistemological focus is aimed at enabling students to become knowledgeable about approaches to the study of disciplines and scientific knowledge development.  Forces affecting the development of knowledge, the origins of key terms and concepts, and identification of major themes in nursing will be examined. Second, the nature of theory and strategies for theory development in nursing will be evaluated. The appraisal and discussion of theory will enable students to apply a variety of strategies and select an approach for beginning theory development that addresses phenomena in their area of interest.
NURS 506	Nursing Epistemology	3 Units	This course involves the study of knowledge shared among members of the discipline, the patterns of knowing and knowledge development, and criteria for evaluating knowledge claims and philosophy of science.  The course is a search and discussion experience aimed at enabling graduate students to become knowledgeable about approaches to the study of disciplines and scientific knowledge development.  Forces affecting the development of knowledge, the origins of key terms and concepts, and identification of major themes in nursing will be explored.
NURS 507	Clinical Knowledge	3 Units	This course is structured to allow students to develop clinical knowledge about their area of interest and to begin the process of identifying clinical research questions.  Supervision for this experience will be twofold.  Students will be placed with an expert clinician with a minimum of a master's degree (in nursing) to identify and arrange relevant clinical experiences.  The student and the clinician will work with the course faculty to create opportunities for the student to experience the clinical phenomena of interest, which may include actual "hands-on" experience.  Students will also meet regularly with the other students in the course and the course faculty for group supervision that focuses on linking clinical practice issues to research questions.  Course requirements would include eight hours of practicum experiences per week.
NURS 508	Context of Care	3 Units	This course is designed to allow students to explore the social, political, economic, and health care issues that form the context for their clinical phenomena of interest.  The intent of this course is for the student to become knowledgeable about the broader forces that affect their clinical problem.  Topics might include current research in their field, as well as health policy related to their phenomena, political entities that affect funding, and the regulation of practice in their area of interest. The student will need a content expert to help them plan and coordinate their practicum experiences, which should be multiple and varied, and include exposure to both local and state level entities. Prereq: NURS 507 or equivalent.
NURS 510	Health Disparities	3 Units	This course aims to provide theoretical and application tools for students from many disciplinary backgrounds to conduct research and develop interventions to reduce health disparities. The course will be situated contextually within the historical record of the United States, reviewing social, political, economic, cultural, legal, and ethical theories related to disparities in general, with a central focus on health disparities. Several frameworks regarding health disparities will be used for investigating and discussing the empirical evidence on disparities among other subgroups (e.g., the poor, women, uninsured, disabled, and non-English speaking populations) will also be included and discussed. Students will be expected to develop a research proposal (observational, clinical, and/or intervention) rooted in their disciplinary background that will incorporate materials from the various perspectives presented throughout the course, with the objective of developing and reinforcing a more comprehensive approach to current practices within their fields.  Offered as CRSP 510, PQHS 510, MPHP 510, NURS 510, and SASS 510.
NURS 511	Strategies for Theory Development	3 Units	This course examines the nature of theory and strategies for theory development in nursing. Students will explore a variety of strategies and select an approach for beginning theory development that addresses nursing phenomena in their area of interest. Prereq: Admission to PhD nursing program or requisites not met permission.
NURS 518	Qualitative Nursing Research	3 Units	This course examines research approaches directed towards the development of nursing knowledge.  This course will include methods and issues in data collection, analysis, and critique of research findings.  It will focus on the philosophical and epistemological foundations of qualitative research, present an overview of various methodological approaches, examine the criteria for rigor, and analyze ethical issues in qualitative methodologies. Prereq: Admission to PhD nursing program or requisites not met permission.
NURS 523	Advanced Practice Nursing in Critical Care Transport Practicum	1 - 5 Units	This practicum is designed to promote safe, effective care in critical care transport (CCT) by advanced practice (APN) nurses and APN nursing students.  Experiential learning is individualized with a focus on the assessment and management of patients with life-threatening or time sensitive conditions. Precepted experiences address the knowledge, skills and attitudes for optimal CCT across the lifespan. Students will be required to have eligibility or certification in AGACNP or equivalent.
NURS 524	Molecular Genetics for the Nurse Scientist	3 Units	This Ph.D. course provides an in-depth forum for discussion of fundamental principles regarding molecular genetics and its relevance to medical genetics, genomics and nursing. The course will cover principles of molecular genetics including an overall discussion of the complexity of the human genome, the structure, function and regulations of genes (DNA, RNA, proteins), genetic variation, inheritance patterns and a brief overview of molecular laboratory techniques used in clinically based research. In addition the course will discuss genetic-based research approaches, and ethical challenges that accompany human genetics research. Admission to PhD nursing program required.
NURS 530	Advanced Nursing Research Methods I	3 Units	This course focuses on conceptualization of a research problem within a nursing perspective, systematic literature review of a substantive area of research, and the design component of a research study to address scientific gaps.  Descriptive, quasi-experimental, experimental, and mixed methods designs will be examined. Threats to internal and external validity will be discussed. The emphasis is on the application of design strategies while encouraging flexibility in conceptualizing a study using different research methods. Coreq: NURS 532 or requisites not met permission.
NURS 531	Advanced Nursing Research Methods II	3 Units	This course focuses on sampling, measurement, instrumentation, data management, intervention development, and human subjects' issues.  These will be discussed and applied within the context of a scientific study in a substantive area that is consistent with theoretical and empirical knowledge and the nursing perspective. Prereq: NURS 530 and NURS 532 or consent of instructor.
NURS 532	Applied Statistics	3 Units	This course will address the assumptions and applications necessary to analyze and interpret questions and research related to clinical practice. Emphasis will be on statistical interpretation of research and other scholarly activities. Data management, statistical analysis and data interpretation, as well as univariate and bivariate statistics will be examined. The course will include a brief overview of multivariate regression. The data analysis process will be examined and deconstructed throughout the course. Offered as NUND 450 and NURS 532. Prereq: Enrolled in the PhD Nursing program.
NURS 533	Introduction to Data Science in Healthcare	3 Units	This course introduces students to key concepts in data science with a focus on applications in healthcare delivery and clinical research. The course will discuss common sources of structured and unstructured clinical healthcare data, and the theory and application of different methodologies including machine learning and artificial intelligence. Students will be introduced to the tools and processes used to clean data, perform analysis, and visualize data through experiential learning. The integration of data science research into clinical practice at the population level (e.g. disease surveillance), system level (e.g. learning health systems) and patient-level (e.g. precision health) will also be discussed. Prereq: NURS 530 and NURS 532.
NURS 553	Cultural Diversity Topics	1 Unit	This course will explore topics around cultural diversity in advanced nursing practice. Concepts related to cultural sensitivity in delivery of healthcare will be integrated.
NURS 557	Advanced Midwifery	6 Units	In this intensive practicum course, students will assume the responsibilities of a beginning practitioner.  Students will synthesize the midwifery management process while providing continuity of care and integrating all areas of core competency as defined by the American College of Nurse-Midwives (ACNM).  Students will explore the professional aspects and history of midwifery practice.  The ACNM hallmarks and components of midwifery care will be used as a framework for understanding current issues related to midwifery education and practice in the United States. Prereq: NURS 457.
NURS 559	Primary Care for Women's Health Providers	4 Units	In this course, students will assess and manage primary health care problems commonly encountered by diverse populations in ambulatory settings. This course will prepare the student to use diagnostic reasoning to identify and manage common acute and chronic health problems. Comprehensive care including physical, psychological, and cultural safety will be integrated throughout the clinical experience.  Supervised clinical experience will focus on anticipating and identifying complications and participating in consultations, referrals, and collaborative management. Prereq: NURS 430 and NURS 455.
NURS 601	Special Problems	1 - 12 Units	This course is offered, with permission, to Ph.D. students in Nursing undertaking reading in a field of special interest.
NURS 609	Health Care Policy and Planning	3 Units	The primary focus of this course is to explore the leadership role of nurses in health policy development and implementation as well as the role of research in health care policy formation and planning.  Special emphasis is placed on selected national and international health policy issues that form the socio-political and economic context of nursing care and practice.  Ethical dimensions of public policy formulations and implementation are highlighted. Offered as NUND 508 and NURS 609.
NURS 615	Topical Seminar in Health Science Research	3 Units	This PhD course is designed to provide an in-depth knowledge of research issues in a given area.  Opportunities are provided to apply knowledge for further development of the student's research interests and ideas.  An in-depth examination of selected theoretical and methodological approaches to the development of research related to human science will be emphasized.  Interrelationships among theory, research, and knowledge from nursing and related disciplines will be explored. Prereq: Admission to PhD nursing program or Requisites Not Met permission.
NURS 630	Advanced Statistics: Linear Models	3 Units	This course is focused on advanced procedures for data analysis and statistical inference in health research.  The course is devoted to discussion and application of linear models, including simple and multiple regression and logistic regression to study design.  The role of assumptions and theory in guiding the analysis plan is emphasized through lecture, readings, and critical evaluation of published research in the student's area of interest. Prereq: NURS 532 or Requisites Not Met permission.
NURS 631	Advanced Statistics: Multivariate Analysis	3 Units	This course focuses on selected advanced multivariate topics and procedures in health research.  Topics will be covered through lecture, readings, computer analysis as well as critical analysis of published research in the health sciences fields.  Topics to be covered in this course include: survival analysis, factor analysis, path analysis, repeated measures ANOVA and advanced regression techniques (logistic, loglinear, mixed models). Prereq: NURS 630 or Requisites Not Met permission.
NURS 632	Advanced Statistics: Structural Equation Modeling	3 Units	This course focuses on advanced data analytic procedures using structural equation modelings (SEM) in health research.  Content will be explored through lecture, computer analysis, and critical analysis of relevant research. Topics covered in this course include: SEM with latent variables, path analysis adjusting for measurement error, nested models, and advanced SEM techniques, e.g., exploratory SEM, autoregressive models, latent growth curves, and latent class analysis using mixture modeling. Prereq: NURS 630 or Instructor Consent
NURS 671	Proposal Development	1 - 6 Units	Provides an opportunity for guided development of a candidacy proposal through planned contact with a designated committee of faculty members. The aim is to assist the student in the development of a refined proposal with strong scientific merit. The course should be utilized only by those with a candidacy proposal statement. Minimum 3 hours required for progression in program.
NURS 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 12 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
SJUS 100	Introduction to Social Justice	3 Units	Quests for justice and struggles against injustice have shaped human understanding, behavior and relationships for centuries. Individuals operate within community contexts created through interactions and relationships structured by sociability, belonging, and responsibility. Probing broad questions, this signature core course will encourage students to think critically and expansively about the social world and the conditions of humanity. The course will provide a foundational exploration of social justice concepts, issues, and remedies, thereby developing the necessary analytical tools and information to assess inequality and injustice and address historical and contemporary issues. Following an interdisciplinary, case-study approach, featuring faculty from different schools and departments at CWRU, this course also will provide students with multiple frameworks for understanding the interconnections between what are often perceived as disparate and disconnected fields of study and inquiry. Three primary questions guide the course: What is social justice? Why does social justice matter? What can be done? Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 210	Perspectives on Health: Introduction to Medical Humanities and Social Medicine	3 Units	This survey course is designed to give students a broad overview of medical humanities and medical social sciences.  Students will engage materials from a wide range of disciplines and learn how to analyze which perspectives afford and obscure which types of knowledge relevant to health, illness and clinical practice.  Students will learn how to identify epistemology, methodology, theory and data from various disciplinary perspectives.  This course is relevant for students engaged in pre-clinical education as well as those interested in medical humanities and medical social sciences.
BETH 271	Bioethics: Dilemmas	3 Units	We have the genetic technology to change nature and human nature, but should we?  We have the medical technology to extend almost any human life, but is this always good?  Should we clone humans?  Should we allow doctor-assisted suicide for the terminally ill?  This course invites students from all academic disciplines and fields to examine current and future issues in bioethics--e.g., theory and methods in bioethics; death and dying; organ transplantation; genetics; aging and dementia; fertility and reproduction; distributive justice in health care access. The course will include guest lecturers from nationally-known Bioethics faculty. Offered as BETH 271 and PHIL 271.
BETH 302	Independent Studies in Bioethics	1 - 3 Units	This course is for students with Bioethics-related special interests not adequately addressed in regular courses, and who wish to work independently in consultation with faculty.
BETH 309	Aging, Ageism, and Embodiment	3 Units	We all grow old (if we are so lucky!).  But who wants to be called "old"?  And how does the experience of "growing old" differ based on one's sex or gender, sexuality, race or ethnicity, and socioeconomic or disability status? In this course, we will consider the social, cultural, scientific, medical, and personal meanings of aging, and how these meanings, as well as the embodied experience of aging in America, are influenced by multiple forms of ageism. We will interrogate the assumptions and stereotypes about age that circulate through mainstream American culture and medicine and how these shape interpersonal and institutional practices.  How might we begin to recognize, respond to, and change ageism, and thus our own inevitable experiences of aging? The course requires reading quizzes, papers, participation, and attendance, and for graduate students an additional presentation. Offered as BETH 309 and BETH 409. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 315	International Bioethics: Policy and Practice	3 Units	Taught by Case and international faculty, this course will include 7-10 days of intensive didactic and experiential learning in one of several "host" countries. Examples of sites include: Free University of Amsterdam and University of Utrecht in the Netherlands; University of Paris in France; and Ben Gurion University in Israel. It will afford a unique opportunity to gain perspective on important bioethics issues in different societies, i.e., euthanasia, public health policies, access to healthcare, and stem cell research. At the international site, students will spend 6 hours per day (5 days) in seminar (involving didactics, discussion, and guided-observation clinical experience). There will be two 3-hour preparatory sessions, required reading, and two 3-hour post trip sessions. Requirements: preparation, attendance, and class participation, a 12-15 page paper (undergraduate credit) and a 15-20 page paper (graduate credit). Graduate credit will also require students to prepare a presentation for a post-intensive session. Enrollment will be capped at 25. This course has an additional fee to cover costs of travel and lodging. Limited scholarships are available. Offered as BETH 315 and BETH 415.
BETH 315A	International Bioethics Policy and Practice: Women's Health in the Netherlands	3 Units	This 3-credit course allows students to familiarize themselves with social policies and practices related to women's health in the United States and the Netherlands.  Issues covered in the course include birth control and family planning, abortion, prenatal testing, childbirth, health care disparities, cosmetic surgery, prostitution and trafficking in women.  This course also addresses the US and Dutch national policies regarding the public provision of health care for women.  The course places an emphasis on the ways in which social norms shape policies over time, which political actors are involved in shaping women's health policy, and the balance between women's health as a matter of the public good or individual responsibility.  This course substantively explores gender-specific cultural values and practices in relation to women's health in the United States and the Netherlands and will help students develop the analytical skills necessary for evaluating social policy and ethical issues related to women's health. Offered as BETH 315A, BETH 415A and WGST 315A. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 315B	International Bioethics Policy and Practice: Public Health in the Netherlands	3 Units	This one week 3-credit intensive course will be held in Amsterdam, The Netherlands.  Taught by faculty from Case and Utrecht University, this course offers students a cross-cultural perspective on ethical dilemmas raised by the practice of public health in the United States and Northern Europe.  Additionally, this course examines policies related to prostitution, drug use, sex education, infectious disease prevention, and access to health care and how they differ in the cultural and political settings of U.S. and the Netherlands.  We will examine both the rationales and outcomes of Dutch and American policies, stimulating course participants to consider their own views on these often controversial issues. Prior to the trip, students will attend lectures at Case, which will acquaint them with the theoretical approaches to public health ethics and major issues raised in the practice of public health.  In these pre-trip sessions, students will also analyze and report on a case study designed to stimulate critical thinking on comparative public health ethics.  In Amsterdam, students will attend lectures that will be supplemented by site visits and discussion sessions aimed at exploring the ethics of public health policy and practice in the Netherlands.  Following the intensive week in Amsterdam, students will meet with instructors at Case for two hours to discuss their experiences and compare policies and practices in the U.S. and the Netherlands. Offered as BETH 315B and BETH 415B. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 315C	International Bioethics Policy and Practice: Health Care Costa Rica	3 Units	This 3-credit course gives students the unique opportunity to observe patients and practitioners encounter in a radically different health care system.  Costa Rica has one of the most comprehensive health care systems in the Western hemisphere, featuring the innovative use of mid-level health care workers organized in basic comprehensive health care teams.  This has resulted in a longer life expectancy than the United States, despite a per capita GDP of only $10,000 per person. Students will gain first-hand experience of Costa Rican health care through field experiences at sites including a national hospital in the capital city, San Jose; a peripheral treatment clinic in a smaller town; and observation of the work of an integrated basic health care team in an indigenous reserve.  Following each visit, students will discuss the practical and ethical dilemmas that practitioners face in the context of the Costa Rican health care system.  Specific topics include: health inequalities within and between nations; the ethics of transplantation, medical research, and end-of-life care; and health care in rural environments and with indigenous populations. Offered as BETH 315C and BETH 415C. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 315D	French Connections, A Cross-Cultural Comparison of Medical Ethics	3 Units	This 3-credit course is collaboration between Case Western Reserve University and the University of Paris. The course includes a ten-day trip to Paris, France over Spring Break. This course offers a cross-cultural comparison of the French and American medical systems. Students will have the unique opportunity to learn first-hand how the French medical education system is structured and how the social, cultural and political contexts in France shape medical and ethical issues. The trip includes guided field experiences in French clinical settings as well as opportunities to engage with French faculty members and physicians about contemporary issues in bioethics. Ethical issues that may be considered may include reproductive rights, decision-making involving severely impaired newborns, withholding/withdrawing life-sustaining treatment and issues in organ donation and transplant.  The course also will also emphasize the role of French culture and history while in Paris with museum and site visits designed to complement seminar content and offer real-life illustrations of course content. Prior to the trip, students attend six hours of lectures, either at Case Western Reserve University or via a web-based tutorial. They are expected to become familiar with the representative articles assigned for the course, and be prepared to integrate those readings into pre-trip class participation and active participation while in France. Following the trip, students meet with the instructor for an additional four hours to discuss and synthesize their experiences. Offered as BETH 315D and BETH 415D. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 315F	Comparison in Bioethics, Spanish and American Perspectives on Health, Medicine, and Culture	3 Units	This 3-credit intensive course will include several day long sessions at CWRU and two weeks of classes and activities in the city of Granada, Spain. Taught by faculty from CWRU and UPV/EHU, this course offers students a cross-cultural perspective on bioethics in the United States and Spain. It uses the medium of film, complemented by readings in bioethics, film criticism, and medical research, to introduce students to a number of compelling bioethics issues, including end-of-life, reproductive ethics, biomedical research and organ transplantation. Offered as BETH 315F and BETH 415F. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 315G	Death, Dying & Euthanasia: Netherlands & the USA	3 Units	Is it ever permissible for physicians to kill their patients? In the Netherlands, the answer is yes. In the United States, it is no. Are the Dutch sliding down a moral slippery slope? Are the Americans compromising the rights and dignity of dying patients? This 3-credit course is a unique opportunity to examine a range of Dutch and American end-of-life policies and practices with special focus on the unique ethical, cultural, religious, and legal contexts in which they developed. This course will compare how two liberal democracies, the United States and the Netherlands, have handled difficult end-of-life issues, including: The Dutch regulation of euthanasia; Regulation of physician-assisted suicide in the state of Oregon; Terminal sedation; End-of-life decisions in newborns; Withholding and withdrawing of artificially-provided fluids and nutrition; The legal basis for end-of-life decision making in the USA; Palliative care and hospice; Public trust in medicine and physicians. In the United States, teaching methods will include lectures, case discussion, and exposure to how some of the course's themes are reflected in popular culture such as movies. Offered as BETH 315G and BETH 415G. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 315H	Water Security and Social Justice in Brazil	3 Units	CWRU, through the Center for Global Health and Diseases, has had projects, student exchanges and courses with institutions in Brazil and especially with the state of Bahia for over 30 years.  In that time, personal and professional relationships have been developed with branches of the Ministry of Health (Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, the Municipal and State Health Departments), the Federal University of Bahia, and the Bahiana School of Medicine and Public Health.  Brazil is the second largest country in the Western Hemisphere and the 7th or 8th largest economy in the world.  There are more people who speak Portuguese in South America than Spanish.  Despite newly discovered oil, enormous natural and human resources, development in Brazil has been uneven with the Northeast remaining the least developed.  The Northeastern state of Bahia ranked 22nd out of 27 states on the UN's Index of Human Development (http://www.pnud.org.br/IDH/DH.aspx# and http://www.atlasbrasil.org.br/2013/pt/home/).  The State capital, Salvador, ranks 14th out of 20 major metropolitan regions and is one site for this study abroad program.  The second site, the rural town of Ubaíra, is ranked 4590 out of 5565 municipalities.  Even with large social inequities and health care disparities, the Brazilian government and society have produced remarkable social policies, have shown a willingness to implement these policies and have the resources to significantly improve the lives of its most impoverished citizens.  Critical basic infrastructure for health and development is water.  Its consumption is essential; it is a mechanism for waste disposal, industry and agriculture are dependent on its supply.  The problem of water quantity and quality are common all human societies (witness the drought in California and the burning Cuyahoga).  Individuals from all walks of life will need to assess issues of water at some time, from doctors, engineers, urban planners, lawyers and politicians.  In Brazil the issues of water are more exposed and easier to examine on different scales than in the U.S.  The problem also resides within a social, health care, and political context that compares well and at the same time contrasts sharply with that of the USA. As a student in this course, you will gain first-hand knowledge of the social and public health challenges regarding water security in Brazil.  Through field experiences in the capital city of Salvador and the rural town of Ubaíra, you will immerse yourself in interdisciplinary perspectives on the public health, scientific, political, and bioethical dimensions of water security in Brazil.  This immersive experience will be facilitated by faculty from the CWRU Dept. of Bioethics and the Center for Global Health and Diseases, the Brazilian Ministry of Health, the Federal University of Bahia, the Bahiana School of Medicine and Public Health, and Brazilian graduate student participants. Offered as: INTH 315, INTH 415, BETH 315H, and BETH 415H. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 315J	Dutch Perspectives: Drugs, Decriminalization and Detention	3 Units	This course will offer students the opportunity to compare and contrast the ways in which the Netherlands and the United States approach drug use. In particular, students will be asked to carefully examine the ethical dimensions of harm reduction programs, policies regarding the availability and the decriminalization of drugs, and the critical role of detention and correctional medical care in addressing drug use. The course will include an introduction to the Dutch and U.S. health care and health insurance systems and will consider how the construction of the patient-physician relationship impacts the prevalence and treatment of drug use in each country. In addition, students will explore the ethics of public health initiatives and social programs aimed at drug users in both settings, including those designed for particular populations such as immigrants and older users. The course will pay special attention to the unique challenges and ethics of the opioid crisis in the U.S.  Offered as BETH 315J and BETH 415J. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 315Y	Conservation, Compassion and Awe in Yellowstone National Park: Environmental Ethics and Human Health	3 Units	This class brings together the study of conservation, ethics and human well-being in a hands-on investigation at Yellowstone National Park.  The course returns to the original meaning of the term bioethics as including the biome.  It covers conservation ethics and human relationships with the environment and other species as they impact human health across multiple levels.  The course draws on theories, models, and methods from psychological anthropology and political ecology to frame the complex dynamics of interaction.  The evolution and psychology of compassion and awe are engaged in processual models of human interaction with the natural world and other species.  Both have important implications for human health in everyday behavioral practice and in clinical settings. The course involves pre-departure study and then will integrate the materials in the field in Yellowstone National Park looking at contemporary and historical issues in partnership with Yellowstone Forever Institute instructors.  In particular, the case of the conservation of the American bison will be used to understand multi-level issues over time in culture, politics, environment, human behavior, and health.  The course requires papers, participation, attendance and a field journal. Offered as BETH 315Y and BETH 415Y.
BETH 316	Death, Dying, and Modern Medicine	3 Units	Despite death's inevitability, we consciously and unconsciously disguise or resist its reality in dreams, fairy tales, allegories, and even jokes.  In his book, How We Die: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter, Sherwin Nuland describes how we have turned increasingly to modern medicine as one more means of denying the reality of death.  As a surgeon with more than forty years of experience in a major metropolitan hospital, Nuland admits to actively participating in this denial.  Modern medicine, he argues, influences how we as individuals and as a culture not only view but also experience death.  "Modern dying," he contends, "takes place in the modern hospital, where it can be hidden, cleansed of its organic blight, and finally packaged for modern burial."  This course uses literature, history, and personal and critical accounts related to death as points of reference for examining the role modern medicine has come to play in how we die. The course requires out-of-class service learning, reading quizzes, papers, participation, and attendance. For graduate students, there are additional paper and presentation requirements. No prerequisites required. Offered as BETH 316 and BETH 416.
BETH 319	Medical Science and Technology in Society	3 Units	Science, Technology, and Society (STS) is an interdisciplinary field of scholarship that examines how social, cultural, historical, ethical, and political forces impact scientific research and technological development: and, in turn, how our beliefs, values, and perspectives change in response to scientific and technological innovation. This course will take an STS approach to the study of human health and medicine. We will explore how advances in contemporary biomedicine have affected society and culture, and in turn, how society and culture influence medical science, technology, and clinical practice. Topics we will explore include reproductive technologies, genetics, disability, cyborgs and human enhancement, pharmaceuticals, medical practice, and end-of-life care. The course will prepare students to think critically about scientific and medical knowledge, to thoughtfully examine the relationships between science, technology and culture at large, and to consider the ways that new medical technologies shape and re-shape our understandings of illness, health, and the human body. Weekly course meetings will implement a blend of lectures, discussions, and in-class exercises. Offered as BETH 319 and BETH 419.
BETH 339	Disability in Society	3 Units	"Disability" refers to health conditions that fundamentally alter how someone engages in the world around them, including physical, psychological, and developmental illnesses. Everyone will experience disability in their lives, whether temporary or chronic, making it especially important to consider how disability shapes, and is shaped by, society at large. In this course, students will learn about the multifaceted relationships between disability and society, including the impact of ethical, cultural, political, and technological factors on the wellbeing of people with disabilities. We will critically examine representations of people with disabilities in literature, the arts, and popular media in order to interrogate the assumptions and stereotypes about disability that circulate through mainstream culture and how they shape interpersonal and institutional practices. Throughout these topics, students will reflect on the intersections of race, gender, and age with disability through a multi-disciplinary lens, drawing on bioethics, anthropology, sociology, literary studies, and the arts. The course sessions will blend lecture and discussion, and assessments will include written responses and exams. Offered as BETH 339 and BETH 439.
BETH 357	Christian Bioethics	3 Units	Bioethics is concerned with both clinical and population level healthcare issues. Christian Bioethics aims to integrate the discipline of theology with the field of bioethics to critically evaluate the goals of healthcare and the practices associated with these goals. This course examines the theological sources used to evaluate contemporary clinical and population level healthcare issues. We will examine issues including abortion, end-of-life care, genetic enhancement, the concept of disability, health inequalities and justice, and personal and social responsibility for health, especially as these relate to political and social justice. We will also become familiar with religious moral reasoning and the relationship between religious ethics and nonreligious moral and political philosophy. In doing so, students will learn about the foundations for religion, medicine, and ethics as they intersect with care for individuals and communities. Offered as BETH 357, BETH 457, PHIL 357, PHIL 457, RLGN 357 and RLGN 457.
BETH 360	Science and Society	3 Units	This course examines the complex ethical and other value relationships that exist between science and society.  Students will be encouraged to question the simplistic view that science proceeds independently of societal values and contentious ethical commitments.  A range of other social factors, such as ethical belief systems, political forces, and large-scale financial interests all influence new scientific and technological developments.  In order to illuminate each of these larger themes, this course focuses on three exciting areas of scientific inquiry: stem cell research; synthetic biology; and nanotechnology.  Each of these contentious scientific fields provides an excellent view into the challenging ethical, cultural, social, political, and economic issues that will face students, both as scholars and as citizens.  No prior technical knowledge is necessary for any of these scientific areas.  All relevant scientific information will be provided during the course by the professor. Offered as BETH 360, BETH 460 and PHIL 360.
BETH 371	Advanced Bioethics	3 Units	This course offers upper-level instruction on many key bioethical issues introduced in BETH/PHIL 271.  The class follows a discussion-intensive seminar format.  Students begin with an in-depth analysis of ethical issues surrounding the conduct of clinical trials, both within the U.S. and through U.S.-sponsored research abroad.  Next students examine the philosophical and practical challenges involved in medical decision making for adults and pediatric patients.  This course concludes by addressing the broader ethical problem of what duties we owe to future generations in terms of our reproductive choices and the allocation of health-related public expenditures.  Each of these general topic areas - clinical trials, medical decision making, and future generations - is of crucial importance for all students whether one plans to enter a career in biomedical research, the healthcare professions, or some other career path.  Everyone is a potential patient or the family member of a potential patient.  The topics covered in Advanced Bioethics will help prepare students to become responsible participants in an increasingly complex biomedical world.  Offered as BETH 371 and PHIL 371. Prereq: BETH 271 or PHIL 271.
BETH 371C	Advanced Bioethics: Clinical Observation	1 Unit	This course is a one credit class intended to supplement BETH 371: Advanced Bioethics.  In this course students will become familiar with the clinical, psychological, social, professional, and institutional context in which bioethical problems arise.  Students are exposed to clinical cases as they arise, to hospital ethics committees and ethics consultation programs, to institutional review boards (IRB), and to hospital policies covering "do not resuscitate" orders (DNR), advance directives, withdrawal of artificial feeding, and medical futility. The clinical rotation will consist of 20 hours of supervised observation where students attend structured clinical activities such as ICU rounds, case conferences as well as shadow clinicians that work with the Department of Bioethics and are used to having students at various levels of observers.  The purpose of the clinical rotation will be to give students first hand observational experience in the health care system and how the key bioethical issues discussed in BETH 371 manifest in the clinical setting.  The primary locations for this course are MetroHealth Medical Center and Louis Stokes Cleveland VA Medical Center. Prereq: BETH 271 or PHIL 271.  Coreq: BETH 371 or PHIL 371.
BETH 401	Foundations in Bioethics I	6 Units	The first of the two required seminar courses, this course covers five basic topic areas in bioethics: death and dying; health professional-patient relationship; method and theory in bioethics; organ transplantation; and ethics and children.  The course meets twice weekly and is taught in seminar format by Center faculty members who are experts on specific topics.  Preentry.
BETH 402	Foundations in Bioethics II	6 Units	This course completes the required seminar core and covers the basic bioethics topic areas: health care justice; defining 'health care needs;' reproduction and fertility ethics; research ethics; and ethics in genetics.  The course meets twice weekly and is taught in seminar format by Center faculty members who are experts on specific topics. Recommended preparation: BETH 401.
BETH 402C	Bioethics and Medical Humanities Capstone	1.5 Unit	The Capstone paper is an opportunity for the student to demonstrate mastery in an area of Bioethics and Medical Humanities. It is intended to show engagement with interdisciplinary literature in Bioethics and Medical Humanities and also an ability to construct and support an argument. The specific topic in Bioethics and Medical Humanities is chosen by the student in consultation with faculty advisers. Prereq: BETH 401 and student in MA Bioethics and Medical Humanities program. Coreq: BETH 402.
BETH 403	Mental Illness and Bioethics in Film and Literature	1.5 Unit	This course examines bioethical issues that arise in the representation of mental illness and its treatment  in film and literature.  Course requirements include viewing 3 films and reading 3 or more books during the course of the semester, in-class discussion, and assigned writing.  The films and works of literature will be rotated each year, with some possible repetitions. Prereq:  Graduate Bioethics student or Requisites Not Met permission.
BETH 404	Poetry Boot Camp Workshop: Bioethical Poetry Topics Human, Mental Illness and Animal Welfare	3 Units	In this introductory poetry writing workshop and study of bioethical issues in poetry, you will write poems each day and read a wide variety of poems that are organized according to either bioethical themes or demonstrations of types of poem or craft. Participants will undertake in-class study of the following poets: James Wright, John Keats, Sylvia Plath, Robert Lowell, Theodore Roethke, and Langston Hughes, among others. As the week proceeds, we will consider how to read and review poetry with special attention to tone, theme, structure, and response to specific words and lines from poems.
BETH 405	Clinical Ethics Rotation	1.5 - 3 Units	In this course students will become familiar with the clinical, psychological, social, professional, and institutional context in which ethical problems arise.  This course exposes students to clinical cases, to hospital ethics committees and ethics consultation programs, to institutional review boards (IRB), and to hospital policies covering the "do not resuscitate" orders (DNR), advance directives, withdrawal of artificial feeding, organ procurement and transplantation, and medical futility.  Requires minimum of 8 total hours of rotation experience per week during two semester 10-week rotations.  Locations for this course include: MetroHealth Medical Center, University Hospitals of Cleveland, and the Hospice of the Western Reserve. Recommended preparation: BETH 401 or concurrent enrollment.
BETH 406	Society, Religion, and Bioethics	3 Units	Focus and Scope of Course:  The course examines the interplay of politics, governmental structures, culture and religion and their impact on ethics questions that arise in the health arena.  The course provides a broad overview of the basic tenets of several major faith traditions and examines how and why the interpretation of such tenets and their impact on bioethics issues varies across different societies.  The specific domains in which we explore such issues, e.g., reproductive health, regenerative medicine, end-of-life issues, infectious disease, may be rotated each year.  Objectives: Students will be able to *Describe how religious views and interests affect policymaking with respect to a variety of health-related issues *Enunciate strategies for the reconciliation of bioethics perspectives stemming from diverse religious interests in a pluralistic society *Compare and contrast the perspective of various world religions with respect to specific bioethics issues Prereq: Open to Graduate Students and Seniors only.
BETH 409	Aging, Ageism, and Embodiment	3 Units	We all grow old (if we are so lucky!).  But who wants to be called "old"?  And how does the experience of "growing old" differ based on one's sex or gender, sexuality, race or ethnicity, and socioeconomic or disability status? In this course, we will consider the social, cultural, scientific, medical, and personal meanings of aging, and how these meanings, as well as the embodied experience of aging in America, are influenced by multiple forms of ageism. We will interrogate the assumptions and stereotypes about age that circulate through mainstream American culture and medicine and how these shape interpersonal and institutional practices.  How might we begin to recognize, respond to, and change ageism, and thus our own inevitable experiences of aging? The course requires reading quizzes, papers, participation, and attendance, and for graduate students an additional presentation. Offered as BETH 309 and BETH 409. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 410	Foundations of Medicine, Society and Culture	3 Units	Topics will include comparative medical systems and concepts of health, medical history, illness narratives and narrative ethics, social determinants of health and health inequalities, analysis of representations of illness and medicine in literature and the arts, and medical rhetoric. Students who complete the course should develop a command of the basic problems, approaches, and literatures in the social and cultural contexts of health sickness, and medicine.  Students will be able to identify epistemology, theory, methodology and data from neighboring disciplines and understand affordances and costs in each.
BETH 411	Narrative Medicine	Methodology in Patient-Centered Medical Education	3 Units	Narrative Medicine, or medicine practiced with narrative skills (as defined by Rita Charon, MD, PhD), is a methodology in patient-centered medical education. Narrative medicine is informed by the theory and practice of reading, writing, telling, and receiving of stories as a clinically empowering practice for anyone engaged (or planning to engage) in the field of healthcare. This course will employ various methods of learning and experiencing narrative, including fundamental skills of close reading and reflective writing and other forms of self-representation. Narrative competence is an important skill that enables a person to "recognize, absorb, interpret, represent, and be moved by the stories of illness". Major themes throughout the course will include caregivers' and patients' empowerment, empathy, narrative ethics, testimony, reflexive writing, and illness and medical stories.   The course will be conducted in a seminar-type format.  Each session will have readings that relate to the theory of narrative (primarily from the Charon textbook but also from other sources in the Ethics and Humanities professional literature) and related health humanities.  Many of the sessions will also include the application of reflective practice/close reading.  Additional elements will be writing workshops and use of film and visual art as narrative.  The class will meet once weekly for a 3 hour session.  This class is open to graduate students in any humanities or healthcare field, and will be especially useful to those who intend to have a future career in which direct care of patients/clients is a part of their work.
BETH 412	Ethical Issues in Genetics/Genomics	3 Units	This course is designed to familiarize graduate students with the major controversies over the generation and use of new human genetic information.  Topics will include the spread of predictive genetic testing, prenatal diagnosis, genetic discrimination, human genetic variation research, eugenics, genetic counseling, and the limits of human gene therapy.  The course will be conducted as a seminar, involving discussions of readings, guest speakers, and student presentations.
BETH 413	A Social Justice Perspective on Digital Medicine and the Digital Divide	1.5 Unit	This course begins by exploring bioethical and social justice perspectives related to the digital divide and to efforts to address gaps.  We will then consider the risks and benefits to individuals and to populations from the proliferating use of health-relevant data from smartphone apps, wearable devices, data generated from our google searches, etc.  We will apply a social justice lens to evaluating how the FDA regulates consumer digital health technology and consider the potential risks and harms that an IRB might consider in evaluating proposals for using devices in clinical research.  Finally, we will apply our learning about the digital divide and digital devices to assess individual and societal risks and benefits associated with apps intended to mitigate the risk of COVID-19.
BETH 415	International Bioethics: Policy and Practice	3 Units	Taught by Case and international faculty, this course will include 7-10 days of intensive didactic and experiential learning in one of several "host" countries. Examples of sites include: Free University of Amsterdam and University of Utrecht in the Netherlands; University of Paris in France; and Ben Gurion University in Israel. It will afford a unique opportunity to gain perspective on important bioethics issues in different societies, i.e., euthanasia, public health policies, access to healthcare, and stem cell research. At the international site, students will spend 6 hours per day (5 days) in seminar (involving didactics, discussion, and guided-observation clinical experience). There will be two 3-hour preparatory sessions, required reading, and two 3-hour post trip sessions. Requirements: preparation, attendance, and class participation, a 12-15 page paper (undergraduate credit) and a 15-20 page paper (graduate credit). Graduate credit will also require students to prepare a presentation for a post-intensive session. Enrollment will be capped at 25. This course has an additional fee to cover costs of travel and lodging. Limited scholarships are available. Offered as BETH 315 and BETH 415.
BETH 415A	International Bioethics Policy and Practice: Women's Health in the Netherlands	3 Units	This 3-credit course allows students to familiarize themselves with social policies and practices related to women's health in the United States and the Netherlands.  Issues covered in the course include birth control and family planning, abortion, prenatal testing, childbirth, health care disparities, cosmetic surgery, prostitution and trafficking in women.  This course also addresses the US and Dutch national policies regarding the public provision of health care for women.  The course places an emphasis on the ways in which social norms shape policies over time, which political actors are involved in shaping women's health policy, and the balance between women's health as a matter of the public good or individual responsibility.  This course substantively explores gender-specific cultural values and practices in relation to women's health in the United States and the Netherlands and will help students develop the analytical skills necessary for evaluating social policy and ethical issues related to women's health. Offered as BETH 315A, BETH 415A and WGST 315A. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 415B	International Bioethics Policy and Practice: Public Health in the Netherlands	3 Units	This one week 3-credit intensive course will be held in Amsterdam, The Netherlands.  Taught by faculty from Case and Utrecht University, this course offers students a cross-cultural perspective on ethical dilemmas raised by the practice of public health in the United States and Northern Europe.  Additionally, this course examines policies related to prostitution, drug use, sex education, infectious disease prevention, and access to health care and how they differ in the cultural and political settings of U.S. and the Netherlands.  We will examine both the rationales and outcomes of Dutch and American policies, stimulating course participants to consider their own views on these often controversial issues. Prior to the trip, students will attend lectures at Case, which will acquaint them with the theoretical approaches to public health ethics and major issues raised in the practice of public health.  In these pre-trip sessions, students will also analyze and report on a case study designed to stimulate critical thinking on comparative public health ethics.  In Amsterdam, students will attend lectures that will be supplemented by site visits and discussion sessions aimed at exploring the ethics of public health policy and practice in the Netherlands.  Following the intensive week in Amsterdam, students will meet with instructors at Case for two hours to discuss their experiences and compare policies and practices in the U.S. and the Netherlands. Offered as BETH 315B and BETH 415B. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 415C	International Bioethics Policy and Practice: Health Care Costa Rica	3 Units	This 3-credit course gives students the unique opportunity to observe patients and practitioners encounter in a radically different health care system.  Costa Rica has one of the most comprehensive health care systems in the Western hemisphere, featuring the innovative use of mid-level health care workers organized in basic comprehensive health care teams.  This has resulted in a longer life expectancy than the United States, despite a per capita GDP of only $10,000 per person. Students will gain first-hand experience of Costa Rican health care through field experiences at sites including a national hospital in the capital city, San Jose; a peripheral treatment clinic in a smaller town; and observation of the work of an integrated basic health care team in an indigenous reserve.  Following each visit, students will discuss the practical and ethical dilemmas that practitioners face in the context of the Costa Rican health care system.  Specific topics include: health inequalities within and between nations; the ethics of transplantation, medical research, and end-of-life care; and health care in rural environments and with indigenous populations. Offered as BETH 315C and BETH 415C. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 415D	French Connections, A Cross-Cultural Comparison of Medical Ethics	3 Units	This 3-credit course is collaboration between Case Western Reserve University and the University of Paris. The course includes a ten-day trip to Paris, France over Spring Break. This course offers a cross-cultural comparison of the French and American medical systems. Students will have the unique opportunity to learn first-hand how the French medical education system is structured and how the social, cultural and political contexts in France shape medical and ethical issues. The trip includes guided field experiences in French clinical settings as well as opportunities to engage with French faculty members and physicians about contemporary issues in bioethics. Ethical issues that may be considered may include reproductive rights, decision-making involving severely impaired newborns, withholding/withdrawing life-sustaining treatment and issues in organ donation and transplant.  The course also will also emphasize the role of French culture and history while in Paris with museum and site visits designed to complement seminar content and offer real-life illustrations of course content. Prior to the trip, students attend six hours of lectures, either at Case Western Reserve University or via a web-based tutorial. They are expected to become familiar with the representative articles assigned for the course, and be prepared to integrate those readings into pre-trip class participation and active participation while in France. Following the trip, students meet with the instructor for an additional four hours to discuss and synthesize their experiences. Offered as BETH 315D and BETH 415D. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 415F	Comparison in Bioethics, Spanish and American Perspectives on Health, Medicine, and Culture	3 Units	This 3-credit intensive course will include several day long sessions at CWRU and two weeks of classes and activities in the city of Granada, Spain. Taught by faculty from CWRU and UPV/EHU, this course offers students a cross-cultural perspective on bioethics in the United States and Spain. It uses the medium of film, complemented by readings in bioethics, film criticism, and medical research, to introduce students to a number of compelling bioethics issues, including end-of-life, reproductive ethics, biomedical research and organ transplantation. Offered as BETH 315F and BETH 415F. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 415G	Death, Dying & Euthanasia: Netherlands & the USA	3 Units	Is it ever permissible for physicians to kill their patients? In the Netherlands, the answer is yes. In the United States, it is no. Are the Dutch sliding down a moral slippery slope? Are the Americans compromising the rights and dignity of dying patients? This 3-credit course is a unique opportunity to examine a range of Dutch and American end-of-life policies and practices with special focus on the unique ethical, cultural, religious, and legal contexts in which they developed. This course will compare how two liberal democracies, the United States and the Netherlands, have handled difficult end-of-life issues, including: The Dutch regulation of euthanasia; Regulation of physician-assisted suicide in the state of Oregon; Terminal sedation; End-of-life decisions in newborns; Withholding and withdrawing of artificially-provided fluids and nutrition; The legal basis for end-of-life decision making in the USA; Palliative care and hospice; Public trust in medicine and physicians. In the United States, teaching methods will include lectures, case discussion, and exposure to how some of the course's themes are reflected in popular culture such as movies. Offered as BETH 315G and BETH 415G. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 415H	Water Security and Social Justice in Brazil	3 Units	CWRU, through the Center for Global Health and Diseases, has had projects, student exchanges and courses with institutions in Brazil and especially with the state of Bahia for over 30 years.  In that time, personal and professional relationships have been developed with branches of the Ministry of Health (Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, the Municipal and State Health Departments), the Federal University of Bahia, and the Bahiana School of Medicine and Public Health.  Brazil is the second largest country in the Western Hemisphere and the 7th or 8th largest economy in the world.  There are more people who speak Portuguese in South America than Spanish.  Despite newly discovered oil, enormous natural and human resources, development in Brazil has been uneven with the Northeast remaining the least developed.  The Northeastern state of Bahia ranked 22nd out of 27 states on the UN's Index of Human Development (http://www.pnud.org.br/IDH/DH.aspx# and http://www.atlasbrasil.org.br/2013/pt/home/).  The State capital, Salvador, ranks 14th out of 20 major metropolitan regions and is one site for this study abroad program.  The second site, the rural town of Ubaíra, is ranked 4590 out of 5565 municipalities.  Even with large social inequities and health care disparities, the Brazilian government and society have produced remarkable social policies, have shown a willingness to implement these policies and have the resources to significantly improve the lives of its most impoverished citizens.  Critical basic infrastructure for health and development is water.  Its consumption is essential; it is a mechanism for waste disposal, industry and agriculture are dependent on its supply.  The problem of water quantity and quality are common all human societies (witness the drought in California and the burning Cuyahoga).  Individuals from all walks of life will need to assess issues of water at some time, from doctors, engineers, urban planners, lawyers and politicians.  In Brazil the issues of water are more exposed and easier to examine on different scales than in the U.S.  The problem also resides within a social, health care, and political context that compares well and at the same time contrasts sharply with that of the USA. As a student in this course, you will gain first-hand knowledge of the social and public health challenges regarding water security in Brazil.  Through field experiences in the capital city of Salvador and the rural town of Ubaíra, you will immerse yourself in interdisciplinary perspectives on the public health, scientific, political, and bioethical dimensions of water security in Brazil.  This immersive experience will be facilitated by faculty from the CWRU Dept. of Bioethics and the Center for Global Health and Diseases, the Brazilian Ministry of Health, the Federal University of Bahia, the Bahiana School of Medicine and Public Health, and Brazilian graduate student participants. Offered as: INTH 315, INTH 415, BETH 315H, and BETH 415H. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 415J	Dutch Perspectives: Drugs, Decriminalization and Detention	3 Units	This course will offer students the opportunity to compare and contrast the ways in which the Netherlands and the United States approach drug use. In particular, students will be asked to carefully examine the ethical dimensions of harm reduction programs, policies regarding the availability and the decriminalization of drugs, and the critical role of detention and correctional medical care in addressing drug use. The course will include an introduction to the Dutch and U.S. health care and health insurance systems and will consider how the construction of the patient-physician relationship impacts the prevalence and treatment of drug use in each country. In addition, students will explore the ethics of public health initiatives and social programs aimed at drug users in both settings, including those designed for particular populations such as immigrants and older users. The course will pay special attention to the unique challenges and ethics of the opioid crisis in the U.S.  Offered as BETH 315J and BETH 415J. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
BETH 415Y	Conservation, Compassion and Awe in Yellowstone National Park: Environmental Ethics and Human Health	3 Units	This class brings together the study of conservation, ethics and human well-being in a hands-on investigation at Yellowstone National Park.  The course returns to the original meaning of the term bioethics as including the biome.  It covers conservation ethics and human relationships with the environment and other species as they impact human health across multiple levels.  The course draws on theories, models, and methods from psychological anthropology and political ecology to frame the complex dynamics of interaction.  The evolution and psychology of compassion and awe are engaged in processual models of human interaction with the natural world and other species.  Both have important implications for human health in everyday behavioral practice and in clinical settings. The course involves pre-departure study and then will integrate the materials in the field in Yellowstone National Park looking at contemporary and historical issues in partnership with Yellowstone Forever Institute instructors.  In particular, the case of the conservation of the American bison will be used to understand multi-level issues over time in culture, politics, environment, human behavior, and health.  The course requires papers, participation, attendance and a field journal. Offered as BETH 315Y and BETH 415Y.
BETH 416	Death, Dying, and Modern Medicine	3 Units	Despite death's inevitability, we consciously and unconsciously disguise or resist its reality in dreams, fairy tales, allegories, and even jokes.  In his book, How We Die: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter, Sherwin Nuland describes how we have turned increasingly to modern medicine as one more means of denying the reality of death.  As a surgeon with more than forty years of experience in a major metropolitan hospital, Nuland admits to actively participating in this denial.  Modern medicine, he argues, influences how we as individuals and as a culture not only view but also experience death.  "Modern dying," he contends, "takes place in the modern hospital, where it can be hidden, cleansed of its organic blight, and finally packaged for modern burial."  This course uses literature, history, and personal and critical accounts related to death as points of reference for examining the role modern medicine has come to play in how we die. The course requires out-of-class service learning, reading quizzes, papers, participation, and attendance. For graduate students, there are additional paper and presentation requirements. No prerequisites required. Offered as BETH 316 and BETH 416.
BETH 417	Introduction to Public Health Ethics	3 Units	The course will introduce students to theoretical and practical aspects of ethics and public health. This course will help students develop the analytical skills necessary for evaluating of ethical issues in public health policy and public health prevention, treatment, and research. Will include intensive reading and case-based discussions. Evaluation based on class participation, a written exercise and a case analysis. Open to graduate students with permission from instructors.
BETH 418	Seminar in Medicine, Society, and Culture	1.5 Unit	This course is designed to facilitate independent intellectual engagement with medical humanities educational programming occurring within the CWRU School of Medicine, the larger campus community, the surrounding medical, cultural and community institutions, as well as nationally and internationally. CWRU and Cleveland are a major national hub for medical humanities and related programming. Students will design and choose a series of medical humanities events to attend. With permission of the instructor(s), students will attend 10 events and write a reflection paper on each event. At the conclusion of the course, students will have interacted with multiple disciplines, scholars, institutions and approaches in medical humanities. Prereq: MA in Bioethics & Med Humanities students only.
BETH 419	Medical Science and Technology in Society	3 Units	Science, Technology, and Society (STS) is an interdisciplinary field of scholarship that examines how social, cultural, historical, ethical, and political forces impact scientific research and technological development: and, in turn, how our beliefs, values, and perspectives change in response to scientific and technological innovation. This course will take an STS approach to the study of human health and medicine. We will explore how advances in contemporary biomedicine have affected society and culture, and in turn, how society and culture influence medical science, technology, and clinical practice. Topics we will explore include reproductive technologies, genetics, disability, cyborgs and human enhancement, pharmaceuticals, medical practice, and end-of-life care. The course will prepare students to think critically about scientific and medical knowledge, to thoughtfully examine the relationships between science, technology and culture at large, and to consider the ways that new medical technologies shape and re-shape our understandings of illness, health, and the human body. Weekly course meetings will implement a blend of lectures, discussions, and in-class exercises. Offered as BETH 319 and BETH 419.
BETH 421	Research Ethics Practicum	1.5 Unit	The Research Ethics Practicum (80 hours,1.5 CREDITS) is designed to complement the theoretical and conceptual training received in the course, Critical Issues in Research Ethics. By way of a series of campus-wide rotations, students learn about the practical, everyday side of research administration, compliance, and scientific review.  Students will work with key staff in research ethics centers, and observe their day-to-day operations, as well as attend institutional review board (IRB) and Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) meetings.  They will become familiar with human subjects, animal, and tissue research regulations and policies as these are applied in an institutional/academic research  context.  Students will also spend time in a clinical trials unit and tour animal care facilities.  The practicum has the following overall objectives: (1) students will be able to identify, analyze, and understand research ethics issues as they develop in the context of actual institutional research governance (2) students will gain an understanding of methods of ethical research design and implementation.
BETH 422	Clinical Ethics: Theory & Practice	3 Units	This course will focus on both theoretical and practical issues in clinical ethics.  Clinical ethics will be distinguished from other areas of bioethics by highlighting distinctive features of the clinical context which must be taken into account in clinical ethics policy and practice.  Fundamental moral and political foundations of clinical ethics will be examined, as will the role of bioethical theory and method in the clinical context.  Topical issues to be considered may  include informed consent; decision capacity; end of life decision making; confidentiality and privacy; the role and function of ethics committees; ethics consultation; the role of the clinical ethicist;  decision making in various pediatric settings (from neonatal through adolescent); the role of personal values in professional life (e.g., rights of conscience issues, self disclosure and boundary issues); dealing with the chronically non-adherent patient; ethical issues in organ donation and transplant; health professional-patient communication; medical mistakes; and other ethical issues that emerge in clinical settings.
BETH 423	Neuroethics	3 Units	This course is designed to provide an overview of ethical issues related to current and future neurotechnologies as they are applied clinical and research settings. We will cover many topics related to medical care for patients with neurological disorders, including cognitive vulnerability, neurodiversity, stigma and biases in mental health, brain implants, consciousness, selfhood in neurodegenerative disease, and enhancement. Classroom activities will primarily consist of discussion of selected readings related to a topic in neuroethics, moderated by the instructor. In addition, experts will be invited to visit the classroom to assist in the dialogue.  Students will actively participate in discussion, debate, written scholarship and presentation to peers. Evaluation will be based on classroom participation, short writing assignments, and an independent project that will be designed in collaboration with the instructor culminate in both a written and oral presentation.
BETH 428	Clinical Ethics Consultation Simulation Course	1.5 Unit	This course will expose students to the complex world of clinical ethics by challenging them to assume the role of a healthcare ethics consultant in an immersive simulated training environment. Frequently used in medical education, simulation is an educational strategy that emphasizes experiential learning. Using medical simulation teaching methods to create various scenarios and situations commonly experienced by professional clinical ethicists, students will learn the core competencies of clinical ethics consultation and how various concepts, laws, policies, and documents impact medical decision making. Given the immersive nature of the course, students will be expected to carry a simulated `on-call pager' as well as to attend in- person simulation sessions in order to simulate the professional role and responsibilities of a clinical ethicist. Prereq: BETH 422 and BETH 405.
BETH 436	Reproductive Ethics and Justice	3 Units	Reproductive ethics deals not only with pregnancy and birth, but also with the broader social, biological, and ethical contexts in which reproductive health lives. Principles of autonomy and justice will guide this course as we examine the ways that people have children, avoid having them, and make parenting decisions, and the contexts in which these actions and decisions happen. We will meet weekly for seminar-style discussion
BETH 439	Disability in Society	3 Units	"Disability" refers to health conditions that fundamentally alter how someone engages in the world around them, including physical, psychological, and developmental illnesses. Everyone will experience disability in their lives, whether temporary or chronic, making it especially important to consider how disability shapes, and is shaped by, society at large. In this course, students will learn about the multifaceted relationships between disability and society, including the impact of ethical, cultural, political, and technological factors on the wellbeing of people with disabilities. We will critically examine representations of people with disabilities in literature, the arts, and popular media in order to interrogate the assumptions and stereotypes about disability that circulate through mainstream culture and how they shape interpersonal and institutional practices. Throughout these topics, students will reflect on the intersections of race, gender, and age with disability through a multi-disciplinary lens, drawing on bioethics, anthropology, sociology, literary studies, and the arts. The course sessions will blend lecture and discussion, and assessments will include written responses and exams. Offered as BETH 339 and BETH 439.
BETH 440	Science and Society Through Literature	3 Units	This course will examine the interaction of scientific investigation and discovery with the society it occurred in. What is the effect of science on society and, as importantly, what is the effect of society on science? An introduction will consider the heliocentric controversy with focus on Galileo. Two broad areas, tuberculosis and the Frankenstein myth, will then be discussed covering the period 1800-present. With tuberculosis, fiction, art and music will be examined to understand the changing views of society towards the disease, how society's perception of tuberculosis victims changed, and how this influenced their treatments and research. With Frankenstein, the original novel in its historical context will be examined. Using fiction and film, the transformation of the original story into myth with different connotations and implications will be discussed. Most classes will be extensive discussions coupled with student presentations of assigned materials. Offered as PHRM 340, BETH 440, PHRM 440, and HSTY 440.
BETH 441	Seminar in Medical and Health Humanities	1.5 Unit	This course is designed to facilitate independent intellectual engagement with medical/health humanities educational programming occurring within the CWRU School of Medicine, the larger campus community, the surrounding medical, cultural and community institutions, as well as nationally and internationally. CWRU and Cleveland are a major national hub for medical/health humanities and related programming. Students will design and choose a series of medical/health humanities events to attend. With permission of the instructor, students will attend multiple events and write a reflection paper on each event. Students will additionally complete readings and respond in discussion forums, conduct further research on a topic and present to their peers, and prepare a project for an external audience such as a written piece submitted for publication. At the conclusion of the course, students will have interacted with multiple disciplines, scholars, institutions and approaches in medical/health humanities.
BETH 442	Animal Ethics in Theory and Practice	1.5 Unit	The course aims to provoke a critical evaluation of the relationship between people and other animals by starting from a solid foundation in factual information about animal cognition and capabilities, about animals as research subjects, as food, as targets of conservation, as objects for human entertainment, and in complex, often paradoxical relationships with humans. We will survey philosophical thought and principle-based theory about animal ethics, before turning to practical and applied animal ethics. The course will use art and culture as a way to understand the relationship between human and non-human life. Prereq:  Students in the MA in Bioethics and Medical Humanities program.
BETH 455	Research Ethics Journal Club	1 Unit	This seminar course will discuss current topics in biomedical research ethics via recently published articles in both the scholarly literature and the popular science press. For each session, students will choose articles with instructor's guidance, prepare discussion questions, and lead discussion. Prereq: Enrolled in the M.A. in Bioethics and Medical Humanities program.
BETH 456	Research Ethics Journal Club	.5 Unit	This in-person seminar course will discuss current topics in biomedical research ethics via recently published articles in both the scholarly literature and the popular science press. For each session, students will choose articles with Dr. Michie's guidance, prepare discussion questions, and lead discussion.
BETH 457	Christian Bioethics	3 Units	Bioethics is concerned with both clinical and population level healthcare issues. Christian Bioethics aims to integrate the discipline of theology with the field of bioethics to critically evaluate the goals of healthcare and the practices associated with these goals. This course examines the theological sources used to evaluate contemporary clinical and population level healthcare issues. We will examine issues including abortion, end-of-life care, genetic enhancement, the concept of disability, health inequalities and justice, and personal and social responsibility for health, especially as these relate to political and social justice. We will also become familiar with religious moral reasoning and the relationship between religious ethics and nonreligious moral and political philosophy. In doing so, students will learn about the foundations for religion, medicine, and ethics as they intersect with care for individuals and communities. Offered as BETH 357, BETH 457, PHIL 357, PHIL 457, RLGN 357 and RLGN 457.
BETH 460	Science and Society	3 Units	This course examines the complex ethical and other value relationships that exist between science and society.  Students will be encouraged to question the simplistic view that science proceeds independently of societal values and contentious ethical commitments.  A range of other social factors, such as ethical belief systems, political forces, and large-scale financial interests all influence new scientific and technological developments.  In order to illuminate each of these larger themes, this course focuses on three exciting areas of scientific inquiry: stem cell research; synthetic biology; and nanotechnology.  Each of these contentious scientific fields provides an excellent view into the challenging ethical, cultural, social, political, and economic issues that will face students, both as scholars and as citizens.  No prior technical knowledge is necessary for any of these scientific areas.  All relevant scientific information will be provided during the course by the professor. Offered as BETH 360, BETH 460 and PHIL 360.
BETH 466	Promoting Health Across Boundaries	3 Units	This course examines the concepts of health and boundary spanning and how the synergy of the two can produce new, effective approaches to promoting health. Students will explore and analyze examples of individuals and organizations boundary spanning for health to identify practice features affecting health, compare and contrast practices and approaches, and evaluate features and context that promote or inhibit boundary spanning and promoting health. Offered as MPHP 466, PQHS 466, SOCI 466, NURS 466 and BETH 466. Prereq: Graduate student status or instructor consent.
BETH 501	Advanced Study in Bioethics	1.5 Unit	The focus and content of this course rotates each semester that it is offered. The course provides students with an opportunity to examine in greater depth a particular issue or dimension of bioethics and/or a particular event with significant bioethical implications. Prereq: Graduate Standing.
BETH 503	Research Ethics and Regulation	1.5 - 3 Units	This course will introduce students to key ethical requirements and issues that arise in the design and implementation of scientific research. Historical developments leading to the establishment of national and international guidelines for ethical conduct in research with human subjects will be addressed. Specific international and national guidelines for ethically responsible research will be explored with attention to their merits and limitations in the conduct of research.  Informed consent, a fundamental requirement for ethical research will be examined.  The function and role of institutional review boards (IRBs) will be described with attention to challenges faced by investigators in adhering to regulatory requirements.  Ethical issues associated with risk assessment and recruitment strategies will be examined.  Ethical issues that arise in the implementation of biobanks and stem cell research will be discussed.  Challenges associated with the development and production of pharmaceuticals will be assessed. The importance of scientific integrity in the conduct of research will be examined with special attention to conflicts of interest and scientific misconduct such as research fraud.  The role of advocacy in promoting research will be addressed. Research ethics and human rights will be explored. The course will end with a discussion of emerging issues in research ethics. Case examples will be used to illustrate ethical complexities surrounding the topics discussed. Offered as BETH 503, CRSP 603 and LAWS 5225.
BETH 504	Critical Readings in Bioethics	3 Units	This course will focus on both normative (traditional) and descriptive (empirical) approaches to bioethics. It will be co-directed by two faculty members, one with a specialization in normative bioethics and one with a specialization in descriptive bioethics.
BETH 505	Methods Normative Bioethics	3 Units	The purpose of this intensive graduate seminar is to master and to critique core philosophical concepts that are implicit in a wide array of bioethical issues.  We will critically examine in a range of contemporary ethical theories beginning with modern conceptions of individual autonomy and concluding with theories of ethical justification.  While no advanced knowledge of ethical theories is presupposed, students are expected to come to class prepared with the course readings and to engage in rigorous philosophical discussions with one another and the professor.
BETH 507	Research Design in Bioethics I	3 Units	The first of two empirical research courses will introduce students to theoretical and methodological approaches in the design and implementation of empirical research on topics in biomedical ethics. Students will be provided with a comprehensive and robust exploration of empirical models for the development of bioethics research and the skills for critically assessing the optimal methods for designing studies relevant to ethical issues in biomedicine.
BETH 508	Research Design in Bioethics II	3 Units	The second of two empirical research courses will introduce students to theoretical and methodological approaches in the design and implementation of empirical research on topics in biomedical ethics. Students will be provided with a comprehensive and robust exploration of empirical models for the development of bioethics research and the skills for critically assessing the optimal methods for designing studies relevant to ethical issues in biomedicine. Prereq: BETH 507.
BETH 511	Grant Writing	3 Units	This course will teach students the fundaments of writing a grant proposal. We will concentrate on NIH-style applications, although the principals of grant writing can be applied to any venue. In the process of working through devising a research question and study design, students will be encouraged to use this as an opportunity to think about their dissertation topic. In addition to applying theoretical and research design knowledge gained through their other core course work, the course will also teach students about how to complete application forms and to create a budget. We will also familiarize students with the peer review process. Each student will produce a draft grant application. The students will form a mock peer review section and will critique the grants.
BETH 512	Clinical Ethics Rotation - Ph.D.	1.5 Unit	In this course students will become familiar with the clinical, psychological, social, professional, and institutional context in which ethical problems arise.  This course exposes students to clinical cases, to hospital ethics committees and ethics consultation programs, to institutional review boards (IRB), and to hospital policies covering the "do not resuscitate" orders (DNR), advance directives, withdrawal of artificial feeding, organ procurement an transplantation, and medical futility.  Requires minimum of 10 total hours of rotation experience per week during two semester 10-week rotations.  Locations for this course include: MetroHealth Medical Center, University Hospitals of Cleveland, and the Hospice of the Western Reserve. Recommended preparation: BETH 520/BETH 521 or concurrent enrollment.
BETH 520	Foundations in Bioethics I - Ph.D.	3 Units	The first of the two required seminar courses, this course covers five basic topic areas in bioethics: death and dying; health professional-patient relationship; method and theory in bioethics; organ transplantation; and ethics and children. The course meets twice weekly and is taught in seminar format by Center faculty members who are experts on specific topics.
BETH 521	Foundations in Bioethics II - Ph.D.	3 Units	The second of the two required seminar courses, this course covers five basic topic areas in bioethics: death and dying; health professional-patient relationship; method and theory in bioethics; organ transplantation; and ethics and children. The course meets twice weekly and is taught in seminar format by Center faculty members who are experts on specific topics.
BETH 602	Special Topics in Bioethics	1 - 3 Units	Students will explore particular issues and themes in biomedical ethics in depth through independent study and research under the direction of a faculty member.
BETH 603	Bioethics Research	6 Units	Research leading toward the MD/MA degree is Bioethics.
BETH 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
SOCI 101	Introduction to Sociology	3 Units	This course examines the basic principles that underlie how sociologists look at the world: "The Sociological Imagination".  It addresses the basic questions: How is social order possible and how does change occur?  The course is designed as a foundation for further study in field of sociology and related disciplines.  It introduces the student to the role that culture and social institutions play in modern society and examines important concepts such as socialization, deviance, social control, patterned inequalities and social change.  These concepts are discussed in the context of both contemporary and historical social theories.  Additionally, the student will be introduced to the methods of inquiry used by practicing sociologists.
SOCI 113	Critical Problems in Modern Society	3 Units	Social inequality is deep-rooted in our culture and society, but often unacknowledged because the mechanisms of that inequality serve dominant groups and those in power. In this course, we will study specific social problems in modern society as a way to understand how and why we allow inequality and problems to exist, for whose interests, and the consequences for individuals and society. Topics can rotate, but will address issues related to wealth and capitalism; technology; structural racism and sexism; health disparities; and political disenfranchisement. We will discuss how all of these intersect with gender/sexualities, race/ethnicity, and social class. After taking this course, students will be able to: 1. Evaluate social conditions that harm some individuals or all people in society. 2. Translate "private troubles" into "public issues." 3. Articulate the purpose and contributions of public sociology. 4. Recognize dimensions of social inequality that cause or perpetuate disadvantage. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SOCI 201	Introduction to Gender Studies	3 Units	This course introduces women and men students to the methods and concepts of gender studies, women's studies, and feminist theory.  An interdisciplinary course, it covers approaches used in literary criticism, history, philosophy, political science, sociology, anthropology, psychology, film studies, cultural studies, art history, and religion.  It is the required introductory course for students taking the women's and gender studies major. Offered as ENGL 270, HSTY 270, PHIL 270, RLGN 270, SOCI 201, and WGST 201. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
SOCI 202	Race and Ethnic Minorities in The United States	3 Units	This is a survey course that looks at the relations between racial and ethnic relations in the United States from an historical and contemporary perspective. This course will look at relations between: European colonists and native Americans; whites and blacks during the period of slavery, Jim Crow, the civil rights era and contemporary period; immigrants at the turn of the 20th and 21st century; Mexicans and Puerto Ricans; and the pan-ethnic groups such as Latinos, Asian Americans, and Arab Americans. We examine the origins of racial/ethnic hierarchies, the social construction of identities, and stratification of racial and ethnic groups. This course will take a macro perspective that examines larger structural forces (e.g., colonization, industrialization, and immigration) to explain inter-group relations, and a constructionist perspective to understand how power manufactures and maintains the social meaning of identities (looking at stereotypes and hegemonic discourse).  Students who have received credit for SOCI 302 may not receive credit for SOCI 202. Offered as AFST 202 and SOCI 202. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SOCI 203	Human Development: Medical and Social	3 Units	Social influences on health and illness across the lifespan. Social determinants of health and health behavior, and delivery of health care.  Guest lecturers from the medical school and other health care providers address professional practice issues across the lifespan. Issues include: new approaches to birthing; adolescent substance abuse: myths and realities of AIDS; risk factors of diseases in middle age; menopause, cognition and aging-Alzheimer's disease; problems in care of elderly; medical ethic of death and dying.
SOCI 204	Criminology	3 Units	What is crime and to what extent does crime affect you? This course will investigate the nature and extent of crime, theories on the causes of crime, types of crime and criminals, and the efforts society makes to cope with and prevent criminal behavior.
SOCI 208	Dating, Marriage, and Family	3 Units	What is the family today? How has it changed over the last century? How will it change in the future? This course aims to answer these questions as it explores the influences of work, education, government, health and religion on today's changing families. The course considers the factors that affect mate selection. It also examines parenting, roles of husbands and wives, and family dysfunction, and divorce.
SOCI 228	Sociology of Sexuality	3 Units	This course analyzes the issues of sex and sexuality from a sociological point of view.  It is centered on the notion that what we consider to be 'normal' or 'natural' about sex and sexuality is, in reality, socially constructed.  One's viewpoint on the issues surrounding sexuality are influenced by the social context in which they live, as opposed to the purely biological viewpoint that presupposes some sense of normalcy or naturalness regarding sexual relations.  A range of topics will be covered, including readings that discuss the variations of sexuality and the notions of sexual ''deviance" in order to explore the cultural and societal variation that exists along the lines of gender, race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, age and disability. Offered as SOCI 228 and WGST 228.
SOCI 239	International Comparative Family Policy	3 Units	This course focuses on the connections between public policies and families and the values that enter into policy debates and family choices. It provides conceptual frameworks that can be used to identify and understand some of the influences underlying policy choices affecting families and also frameworks for evaluating the consequences of these choices for families of diverse structures, socio-economic statuses, and racial and ethnic backgrounds. We will apply this framework to topics such as maternity leave, child care, income assistance, and marriage promotion.  We will compare U.S. policies to those of other industrialized countries, especially those in Italy. You will end the semester by conducting research on a social policy topic that we have not covered during the semester from understanding the initial social problem all the way through to making a policy recommendation to help you learn to explore a new topic independently. Central to the course are the intersections between families and governments via policy outputs, and the roles that citizens and family professionals can play in improving them.  Using UNICEF resources, located in Florence, Italy, we will delve into evidence-based approaches for ameliorating suffering in young families across the globe. Using Florence as a classroom, we will explore differences in family life between the U.S. and Italy as a means to understand the ways in which the state must respond to differing cultures and needs. At the Innocenti Museum, in the same building as UNICEF's research offices, we will see an orphanage that began operations in 1445 and functioned as an orphanage and hospital until 1875, making it the oldest public institution in Italy. The building has been dedicated to the protection of children's rights and education since that time, and provides a backdrop for an early understanding of ways to think about family policy.  Offered as SOCI 239 and WGST 239. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SOCI 250	Law & Society: Law, Rights and Policy	3 Units	How do rights, including human rights, fit in the legal system and society?  We will ask how legal actors, like judges and lawyers, think about rights compared to non-lawyers. We will (try to!) observe court hearings in an Ohio Appellate Court and a local small claims court.  We will closely examine legal institutions, such as correctional facilities.  We will benefit from hearing experts, local, national, and international, discuss how "law" works and whether rights are useful to making change.  We will hear from a law school professor on how law school works and what the practice of law is like.
SOCI 255	Special Topics	1 - 3 Units	Courses taught as special topics seminars focus on selected areas of study in sociology. They tend to be more specialized and emphasis is placed upon a sociological examination of one social institution (such as the media) or on one historical period (such as the '60s).
SOCI 264	Body, Culture and Disability	3 Units	This course examines the ways that the body is constructed through culture, media, and policy and how that, in turn, defines disability.  Students will explore the socio-historical shifts in views and treatment of the body, as a way to understand how this is used to classify, marginalize and contain social differences.  We trace these trends through the American Freak Show to present day Disability Determination Processes in the Social Security Administration.  We further explore how historical perspectives of the body "carry forward" through social institutions such as health care, religion and education.
SOCI 275	Lives in Medicine: Becoming and Being a Physician	3 Units	This course applies a sociological approach to medical profession.  Medical sociology emerged as a distinct field of study in the 1950s in part due to prominent studies of medical education such as The Student Physician by Robert K. Merton and Howard Becker's Boys in White.  Since then, sociologists and other social scientists have written extensively about how issues of race, gender, aging and ethnicity are tied to issues of medical education, medical training, medical socialization and physician decision-making.  Using a life course perspective, this course will examine how lives in medicine change over time; in particular, we'll study changing workforce patterns, physician satisfaction, and burnout.  Other topics to be covered include contemporary ethical issues and alternative professional health careers.  The course provides an overview of how medicine and medical practice have a profound influence on--and are influenced by--social, cultural, political and economic forces.  In short, you'll become familiar with how scholars outside of medicine cast a sociological gaze on the profession.
SOCI 300	Modern Sociological Thought	3 Units	The most profound commentary of industrial society began in the middle of the nineteenth century with thinkers such as Durkheim, Marx, and Max Weber. Students will read the work of these scholars as it appeared in the original sources. They thoughtfully address concepts such as social integration and alienation, crime and punishment, and the social impact of modernization. The course is of special relevance to students in the social sciences, but is also recommended for students in other fields who wish to understand the social context in which professional lives will be conducted. Prereq: SOCI 101 and Sophomore standing.
SOCI 306	Logic of Social Inquiry	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to the epistemologies and research methodologies used in sociological inquiry.  We concentrate on the fundamental principles of research design and on developing a basic understanding of the research process.  Topics include formulating a question, alternative modes of research design and principles of measurement, sampling and analysis. We draw examples from published work, ongoing studies, and publicly available data. Offered as SOCI 306 and SOCI 406. Prereq: SOCI 101 and sophomore standing.
SOCI 307	Social Statistics	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to social statistics, including univariate statistics and bivariate tests of association (chi-square, ttest, ANOVA, correlation, regression).  Topics include: levels of measurement, probability theory and inference; hypothesis testing; and statistical power.  Students receive hands-on instruction using statistical software. A student may receive credit for only one of the following: SOCI 307, ANTH 319, PSCL 282, or STAT 201. Offered as SOCI 307 and SOCI 407. Counts for CAS Quantitative Reasoning Requirement. Prereq: SOCI 101 and Sophomore Standing.
SOCI 310	The Individual in Society	3 Units	This course focuses on the relationship between individuals and the societies in which they live. Influences of values and culture on individuals' selves and identities are discussed as well as how individuals attach meaning to personal life experiences and histories in the context of society at large. Offered as SOCI 310 and SOCI 410. Prereq: SOCI 101.
SOCI 311	Health, Illness, and Social Behavior	3 Units	This course considers the role of social factors (e.g., poverty, occupational and family structure) on health and illness. Discussion will concentrate on the role of health promotion (e.g., anti-smoking campaigns), social behavior and lifestyle in health and health care use. Considerable attention is given to understanding health careers and professions and their role in the health of societies and individuals. Offered as SOCI 311 and SOCI 411. Prereq: SOCI 101 and Sophomore standing.
SOCI 313	Sociology of Stress and Coping	3 Units	This course will focus attention on human stress throughout the lifespan and its role in personal health and well-being. There have been exciting advances in recent years in understanding the nature of stress in everyday life as well as elements of extreme stress. Trauma is experienced by many people due to normative events such as illness and bereavement or natural and man-made disasters such as crime or war. Coping strategies and social supports which ameliorate negative impact of stress will be considered. Offered as SOCI 313 and SOCI 413. Prereq: SOCI 101 and Sophomore standing.
SOCI 320	Delinquency and Juvenile Justice	3 Units	The primary focus of this course is on acquainting the student with the nature and the extent of juvenile delinquency. Accordingly, theoretical approaches to delinquency causation and the prevention, control, and treatment of delinquent behavior in society are addressed. Important aspects of juvenile justice procedures, policy, and practice are examined, and the early history of the juvenile justice system and the many changes occurring over the years are discussed. Prereq: SOCI 101.
SOCI 325	Departmental Seminar in Sociology: Great Books	3 Units	This course fulfills the SAGES requirement of a Departmental Seminar. It focuses on close readings of contemporary classics in sociology, analytical writing and intensive seminar-type discussion. The course examines theoretical perspectives and methodological issues in sociology such that students are able to investigate, analyze and present research findings in written form. Research is always an inherently collaborative process and thus the course will utilize seminar-style discussions to formulate and examine ideas. The seminar will focus on topics germane to a critical reading of books that inform our understanding of large and small group processes as well as individual experiences. Students will be introduced to the sociological imagination as an overarching frame work to examine groundbreaking classical and contemporary books on topics such as health and aging, gender, work and family, social inequality and crime and delinquency, guided by the instructor of record. Readings will provide a sociological perspective for understanding and assessing macro- and micro-level interactions as well as encourage and stimulate critical thinking. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
SOCI 326	Gender, Inequality, and Globalization	3 Units	Using a sociological perspective, this course examines how major societal institutions, including the economy, polity, medicine, religion, education and family, are structured to reproduce gendered inequalities across the globe. Attention is given to the intersections of race/ethnicity, social class, gender and sexuality in social systems of power and privilege. Of critical importance is how gender figures in the relationship between Economic North and Economic South countries. We will elucidate how gender norms vary by culture and exert profound influence on the daily, lived experiences of women and men. The course will be informed by recent scholarship on feminism, women's movements, and globalization. Offered as SOCI 326 and WGST 326. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SOCI 101 or permission of program director.
SOCI 327	Narrative Methods: Life Stories, Oral History, and Sociological Storytelling	3 Units	This course discusses theoretical foundations and methodologies of narrative research, including life stories, oral history, and auto ethnography.  The course is designed for students to complete a research project in the semester using narrative methods to collect and analyze primary data and write up the results. Offered as SOCI 327 and SOCI 427. Prereq: SOCI 101 and SOCI 303.
SOCI 328	Capitalism, Cities, and Inequality	3 Units	This course focuses on social inequality, but through an examination of cities in the U.S. and abroad. In many ways, cities provide a window onto the organization of the larger social world, including regional, state, national and global areas. As such, understanding cities goes far beyond their geographical boundaries. The purpose of this course then is to learn the central role that cities play within a larger capitalist economy, how public policies shape life in cities, how cities organize and reproduce social inequality, and how community groups and organizations challenge and negotiate the organization of power and inequality. The course will examine topics such as the formal and informal labor force, immigration, the growth of global cities and slums, urban poverty, racial segregation, housing and homelessness, crime, gentrification, policing, community organization and political resistance. Offered as AFST 328, SOCI 328 and SOCI 428. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SOCI 101.
SOCI 338	Seminar and Practicum in Adolescents	3 Units	Supervised field placement and attendance in early childhood, child and adolescent settings including preschools, schools, hospitals, and neighborhood centers.  This course is an elective.  Recommended preparation: PSCL 101.   Offered as EDUC 338, PSCL 338 and SOCI 338.
SOCI 344	Health Disparities	3 Units	We have come to understand that stark disparities in health result from the social organization of society, especially inequality in resources and opportunities between and within social groups in the population.  This seminar course examines the differential distribution of health and illness in society, focusing on the social determinants of health.  Topics include: socioeconomic inequality; geographic context; social cohesion and exclusion; health burden in minority populations; policy and federal priorities.  We utilize a life course perspective to understand how inequality "gets under the skin" to produce adverse health. Offered as SOCI 344 and SOCI 444. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SOCI 101 and Sophomore standing.
SOCI 345	Sociology of Mental Illness	3 Units	Focus is on social construction of mental health and illness and sociology of emotions.  Social determinants of psychological distress will be discussed along with social stigma associated with mental illness.  Institutional and community options for care of the mentally ill will be considered along with the impact of recent social movements of deinstitutionalization and independent living.  Offered as SOCI 345 and SOCI 445. Prereq: SOCI 101 and junior/senior standing.
SOCI 347	Sociology of Education	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to the field of sociology of education, which might be more properly called sociology of schooling.  We will examine the development of schools historically and competing paradigms for understanding the place of school in society.  Major theoretical perspectives concerning the nature and consequences of schools for individuals and for societies will be reviewed.  Issues of individual opportunity - including how it is organized by race, class, and gender - will be covered, as well as issues institutional dynamics - including tracking, testing and so-called crisis and reform.  Offered as SOCI 347 and SOCI 447. Prereq: SOCI 101 and junior or senior standing.
SOCI 349	Social Inequality	3 Units	This course discusses classical theory and contemporary research on the mechanisms of power that produce inequalities in income, wealth, education, privilege, and occupational prestige and are manifest in racial, ethnic, gender, age, health, and sexual hierarchies.  Offered as SOCI 349 and SOCI 449. Prereq: SOCI 101 and Sophomore standing.
SOCI 355	Special Topics	3 Units	One or more sections each semester focusing on selected areas of study in sociology. Offered as SOCI 355 and SOCI 455.
SOCI 356	Economic Sociology: Money, Markets, Morals, and Social Life	3 Units	The course introduces students to a sociological perspective on the economy, and the social processes that effect and are embedded in economic behavior, economic institutions and markets.  Students will examine issues such as the social significance of money, the effect of social networks on labor market outcomes, the success and failure of firms, tips and gifts, informal markets and the trade of illicit goods, as well as topics such as immigration and globalization.  Our investigations into these diverse topics reveal how economic phenomena, economic systems and processes are shaped by social networks, cultural understandings and relations of power.  Throughout the course students will examine how economic relations are facilitated--created, maintained, transformed, and constrained--by social relations, revealing that economic life and behavior is just as social as religion, family or education. Prereq: SOCI 101.
SOCI 357	Sociology of Human Rights	3 Units	This course is designed to introduce students to the sociology of human rights.  The starting point is fundamental ideas of rights, including citizenship and human rights.  We then study various aspects of human rights treaty processes.  Over the remainder of the term, we examine different human rights issues, both long-standing and contemporary.  Throughout the term, we will critically approach human rights systems and scholarship. Offered as SOCI 357 and SOCI 457. Prereq: SOCI 101.
SOCI 360	The Sociology of Law	3 Units	This course will focus on the role of rights in the U.S. legal system and society. In particular, we will consider three questions. The first is how do rights fit in the legal system and society? Second, how have different social groups used and thought about rights? Third, how do legal actors like judges and lawyers think about rights compared to non-lawyers? Offered as SOCI 360 and SOCI 460. Prereq: SOCI 101 and Sophomore standing.
SOCI 361	The Life Course	3 Units	Individual experiences and transitions over the life course are considered as the result of societal, cultural, psychological, biological, and historical influences. Developmental issues of childhood, adolescence, young adulthood, middle years and late life are discussed in the context of social expectations, challenges, and opportunities. Emphasis is placed on theoretical readings. Offered as SOCI 361 and SOCI 461. Prereq: SOCI 101 and Sophomore standing.
SOCI 365	Health Care Delivery	3 Units	Health care in the U.S. may be approaching a critical cross-road. Limiting care to older persons and the chronically ill has been proposed as a means to combat rising costs and limited access to health care. What are the alternatives to health care rationing? Socialized medicine? National health insurance? This course deals with issues of cost, quality, and access to health care in the United States and other societies. It considers how solutions by other societies can provide directions for the organization of health care in the U.S. Offered as SOCI 365 and SOCI 465. Prereq: SOCI 101 and Sophomore standing.
SOCI 366	Racial Inequality and Mass Imprisonment in the US	3 Units	This course examines the relationship between racial inequality and mass imprisonment in the U.S. It begins by exploring the role of prisons in the Jim Crow south, with a particular focus on convict-leasing practices, and then turns to the north to examine the social forces that created the black urban ghetto and concentrated black urban poverty. The course also examines the impact that these same social forces have had on Puerto Ricans. We will then explore a series of topics including urban poverty and crime, the war on drugs, the politics of mass incarceration, the prospects that mass incarceration has become the new Jim Crow, and the effects that mass incarceration has had on voting rights, urban communities, families and children. We will conclude with a discussion of varying decarceration arguments, strategies, movements, and achievements. Offered as AFST 366 and SOCI 366. Prereq: SOCI 101 or SJUS 100.
SOCI 369	Aging in American Society	3 Units	Considers the position and participation of aged adults in American society. Sociological perspectives through which to interpret the aging process and old age; social policies; intergenerational relations; lifestyles and how they affect participation of the aged in American society; dying and death serve as major themes. Offered as SOCI 369 and SOCI 469. Prereq: SOCI 101 and Sophomore standing.
SOCI 372	Work and Family: U.S. and Abroad	3 Units	Covers the impact on human lives of the interface between work and family; the different ways gender structures the experience of work and family depending upon racial and ethnic background, social class, age, and partner preference; the impact of historical context on work-family experiences; work-family policies in the United States and other countries. Offered as SOCI 372, WGST 372, and SOCI 472. Prereq: SOCI 101 and Sophomore standing.
SOCI 375	Independent Study	1 - 3 Units	Prereq: SOCI 101 and SOCI 300.
SOCI 377	Population Dynamics and Changing Societies	3 Units	Population and social structure are inextricably linked, as changes in one elicit changes in the other.  Social demography, as a discipline, examines these linkages through the systematic study of the size, composition and distribution of populations and their relationship to the social, political and economic organization of societies.  This course will pay particular attention to mortality, morbidity and health, fertility, family and household organization, and migration as the major processes of population change.  The population dynamics of the United States will be emphasized, with select comparisons to developing and developed countries. Offered as SOCI 377 and SOCI 477. Prereq: SOCI 101 or equivalent; 9 hours in SOCI, ANTH, or ECON.
SOCI 380	Social Movements and Social Change	3 Units	This course will introduce students to the theories of social movements and collective action.  We look at the conditions that create grievances in democracies, how grievances get translated into collective action, and what types of collective actions are successful for bringing about social change.  We discuss a variety of movements in the U.S. in the 20th century to illustrate these theories and concepts. Prereq: SOCI 101 or requisites not met permission.
SOCI 384	Sociology of Sex(es), Gender(s) and Sexuality(ies)	3 Units	Gender is an organizing principle of society and affects every element of social life. Ideas about gender and sexuality shape identity and suffuse interactions, institutions and the societies within which we live. These ideas vary from individual to individual, but also across time and place. This course surveys research on sex, gender and sexuality with the goal of providing students with a theoretical grounding for analyzing sex, gender and sexuality from a sociological perspective. We will explore outdated theories like essentialism and biological determinism, and newer theories rooted in social constructionism. Central to this course is intersectionality, a theoretical perspective that reveals ways in which race/ethnicity, class, gender, sexuality and other social categories are inextricably connected and form interlocking systems of inequality. Additional topics to be explored include: the sexual revolution, the hook-up culture, gendered families, gendered health, occupational segregation, sexual harassment and gendered violence, reproduction, social change and feminist activism. Offered as SOCI 384, SOCI 484, and WGST 384. Prereq: SOCI 101.
SOCI 385	Ethnography	3 Units	The course will be taught twice weekly as a seminar for upper level undergraduate students and graduate students, and will examine some of the key debates in ethnography, read ethnographies published as both books and articles, and explore various ways of designing ethnographic fieldwork. Offered as SOCI 385 and SOCI 485. Prereq: SOCI 101 and Sophomore standing.
SOCI 386	Race and Racism	3 Units	Race and Racism will discuss the classical and contemporary understandings of the concepts of race and racism. We will begin by taking an historical approach, delving into processes of racialization and the first instances where distinctions in human race were noted. We will survey theories of race and use a social constructions approach to examine how sociologists approach the study of racial and ethnic group difference. We will examine how definitions of racial groups have evolved over time and differ across contexts, as well as some of the underlying social and structural processes that create racial hierarchies. At the end of the course students should have a strong understanding of the mechanisms that reproduce systems of racial classification. The course will also examine patterns and trends in racial and ethnic inequality over recent decades, centering our discussion on the legacies of racism, current discrimination, and new processes that are currently unfolding to reproduce inequality.While the course's main focus is to examine understandings of race and racism in the United States, we will devote some attention to how race and ethnicity emerge in different environments by examining race and racism in an international context. Offered as AFST 386, SOCI 386 and SOCI 486. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SOCI 101.
SOCI 392	Senior Capstone Experience	3 Units	SOCI 392 represents the completion of an independent study paper involving exploration of a sociology topic to be chosen in consultation with the student's capstone advisor.  The student will interact regularly with the faculty advisor who will review their progress on the project.  This project allows for original thought and for the tailoring of the research to the student's interests.  The student will integrate theory, methods and social issues as he/she applies critical thinking skills and insights to the analysis of some aspects of a subject chosen from any of the following subfields and concentrations: Gerontology, Social Inequality, Medical Sociology, Crime and Delinquency, The Life Course, Education, Work and Family, Sociology of Law, and Deviance.  The Capstone Project has both a written and an oral component.  Following the submission of the Capstone paper, the student will give a presentation of the project at the Senior Capstone fair, or another forum chosen by the department. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: SOCI 101 and SOCI 300 and SOCI 306 and (SOCI 307 or ANTH 319 or PSCL 282 or STAT 201).
SOCI 397	Honors Studies	3 Units	Intensive investigation of research or conceptual problem; original work under supervision of faculty member. Limited to senior majors. Prereq: Senior status.
SOCI 398	Honors Studies	3 Units	Intensive investigation of research on conceptual problem; original work under supervision of faculty member. Limited to senior majors.
SOCI 400	Development of Sociological Theory	3 Units	This course examines in detail the works of the major social theorists of the 19th and 20th centuries. It is intended to integrate their ideas with the social and historical milieu from which they were born. Questions of intergroup conflict vs. cooperation, interactions between economic, familial, religious, and political institutions, and the development of the self as a function of larger social processes are addressed. Such celebrated figures as Marx, Weber, and Durkheim, as well as modern thinkers will be presented and discussed. Prereq: Graduate standing.
SOCI 401	Contemporary Sociological Theory	3 Units	Current viewpoints in sociological theory are explored using contrasting theoretical perspectives.
SOCI 406	Logic of Social Inquiry	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to the epistemologies and research methodologies used in sociological inquiry.  We concentrate on the fundamental principles of research design and on developing a basic understanding of the research process.  Topics include formulating a question, alternative modes of research design and principles of measurement, sampling and analysis. We draw examples from published work, ongoing studies, and publicly available data. Offered as SOCI 306 and SOCI 406.
SOCI 407	Social Statistics	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to social statistics, including univariate statistics and bivariate tests of association (chi-square, ttest, ANOVA, correlation, regression).  Topics include: levels of measurement, probability theory and inference; hypothesis testing; and statistical power.  Students receive hands-on instruction using statistical software. A student may receive credit for only one of the following: SOCI 307, ANTH 319, PSCL 282, or STAT 201. Offered as SOCI 307 and SOCI 407. Counts for CAS Quantitative Reasoning Requirement. Prereq: SOCI 406.
SOCI 410	The Individual in Society	3 Units	This course focuses on the relationship between individuals and the societies in which they live. Influences of values and culture on individuals' selves and identities are discussed as well as how individuals attach meaning to personal life experiences and histories in the context of society at large. Offered as SOCI 310 and SOCI 410.
SOCI 411	Health, Illness, and Social Behavior	3 Units	This course considers the role of social factors (e.g., poverty, occupational and family structure) on health and illness. Discussion will concentrate on the role of health promotion (e.g., anti-smoking campaigns), social behavior and lifestyle in health and health care use. Considerable attention is given to understanding health careers and professions and their role in the health of societies and individuals. Offered as SOCI 311 and SOCI 411.
SOCI 413	Sociology of Stress and Coping	3 Units	This course will focus attention on human stress throughout the lifespan and its role in personal health and well-being. There have been exciting advances in recent years in understanding the nature of stress in everyday life as well as elements of extreme stress. Trauma is experienced by many people due to normative events such as illness and bereavement or natural and man-made disasters such as crime or war. Coping strategies and social supports which ameliorate negative impact of stress will be considered. Offered as SOCI 313 and SOCI 413.
SOCI 427	Narrative Methods: Life Stories, Oral History, and Sociological Storytelling	3 Units	This course discusses theoretical foundations and methodologies of narrative research, including life stories, oral history, and auto ethnography.  The course is designed for students to complete a research project in the semester using narrative methods to collect and analyze primary data and write up the results. Offered as SOCI 327 and SOCI 427.
SOCI 428	Capitalism, Cities, and Inequality	3 Units	This course focuses on social inequality, but through an examination of cities in the U.S. and abroad. In many ways, cities provide a window onto the organization of the larger social world, including regional, state, national and global areas. As such, understanding cities goes far beyond their geographical boundaries. The purpose of this course then is to learn the central role that cities play within a larger capitalist economy, how public policies shape life in cities, how cities organize and reproduce social inequality, and how community groups and organizations challenge and negotiate the organization of power and inequality. The course will examine topics such as the formal and informal labor force, immigration, the growth of global cities and slums, urban poverty, racial segregation, housing and homelessness, crime, gentrification, policing, community organization and political resistance. Offered as AFST 328, SOCI 328 and SOCI 428. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SOCI 443	Medical Sociology	3 Units	Course covers theories, research methods, and problems in sociology of medicine. Topics include social epidemiology, health and illness behavior, and sick role. Structures and functions of delivery systems and their interrelationships with other social institutions are discussed.
SOCI 444	Health Disparities	3 Units	We have come to understand that stark disparities in health result from the social organization of society, especially inequality in resources and opportunities between and within social groups in the population.  This seminar course examines the differential distribution of health and illness in society, focusing on the social determinants of health.  Topics include: socioeconomic inequality; geographic context; social cohesion and exclusion; health burden in minority populations; policy and federal priorities.  We utilize a life course perspective to understand how inequality "gets under the skin" to produce adverse health. Offered as SOCI 344 and SOCI 444. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SOCI 445	Sociology of Mental Illness	3 Units	Focus is on social construction of mental health and illness and sociology of emotions.  Social determinants of psychological distress will be discussed along with social stigma associated with mental illness.  Institutional and community options for care of the mentally ill will be considered along with the impact of recent social movements of deinstitutionalization and independent living.  Offered as SOCI 345 and SOCI 445.
SOCI 447	Sociology of Education	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to the field of sociology of education, which might be more properly called sociology of schooling.  We will examine the development of schools historically and competing paradigms for understanding the place of school in society.  Major theoretical perspectives concerning the nature and consequences of schools for individuals and for societies will be reviewed.  Issues of individual opportunity - including how it is organized by race, class, and gender - will be covered, as well as issues institutional dynamics - including tracking, testing and so-called crisis and reform.  Offered as SOCI 347 and SOCI 447.
SOCI 449	Social Inequality	3 Units	This course discusses classical theory and contemporary research on the mechanisms of power that produce inequalities in income, wealth, education, privilege, and occupational prestige and are manifest in racial, ethnic, gender, age, health, and sexual hierarchies.  Offered as SOCI 349 and SOCI 449.
SOCI 455	Special Topics	3 Units	One or more sections each semester focusing on selected areas of study in sociology. Offered as SOCI 355 and SOCI 455.
SOCI 457	Sociology of Human Rights	3 Units	This course is designed to introduce students to the sociology of human rights.  The starting point is fundamental ideas of rights, including citizenship and human rights.  We then study various aspects of human rights treaty processes.  Over the remainder of the term, we examine different human rights issues, both long-standing and contemporary.  Throughout the term, we will critically approach human rights systems and scholarship. Offered as SOCI 357 and SOCI 457.
SOCI 460	The Sociology of Law	3 Units	This course will focus on the role of rights in the U.S. legal system and society. In particular, we will consider three questions. The first is how do rights fit in the legal system and society? Second, how have different social groups used and thought about rights? Third, how do legal actors like judges and lawyers think about rights compared to non-lawyers? Offered as SOCI 360 and SOCI 460.
SOCI 461	The Life Course	3 Units	Individual experiences and transitions over the life course are considered as the result of societal, cultural, psychological, biological, and historical influences. Developmental issues of childhood, adolescence, young adulthood, middle years and late life are discussed in the context of social expectations, challenges, and opportunities. Emphasis is placed on theoretical readings. Offered as SOCI 361 and SOCI 461.
SOCI 465	Health Care Delivery	3 Units	Health care in the U.S. may be approaching a critical cross-road. Limiting care to older persons and the chronically ill has been proposed as a means to combat rising costs and limited access to health care. What are the alternatives to health care rationing? Socialized medicine? National health insurance? This course deals with issues of cost, quality, and access to health care in the United States and other societies. It considers how solutions by other societies can provide directions for the organization of health care in the U.S. Offered as SOCI 365 and SOCI 465.
SOCI 466	Promoting Health Across Boundaries	3 Units	This course examines the concepts of health and boundary spanning and how the synergy of the two can produce new, effective approaches to promoting health. Students will explore and analyze examples of individuals and organizations boundary spanning for health to identify practice features affecting health, compare and contrast practices and approaches, and evaluate features and context that promote or inhibit boundary spanning and promoting health. Offered as MPHP 466, PQHS 466, SOCI 466, NURS 466 and BETH 466. Prereq: Graduate student status or instructor consent.
SOCI 469	Aging in American Society	3 Units	Considers the position and participation of aged adults in American society. Sociological perspectives through which to interpret the aging process and old age; social policies; intergenerational relations; lifestyles and how they affect participation of the aged in American society; dying and death serve as major themes. Offered as SOCI 369 and SOCI 469.
SOCI 472	Work and Family: U.S. and Abroad	3 Units	Covers the impact on human lives of the interface between work and family; the different ways gender structures the experience of work and family depending upon racial and ethnic background, social class, age, and partner preference; the impact of historical context on work-family experiences; work-family policies in the United States and other countries. Offered as SOCI 372, WGST 372, and SOCI 472.
SOCI 477	Population Dynamics and Changing Societies	3 Units	Population and social structure are inextricably linked, as changes in one elicit changes in the other.  Social demography, as a discipline, examines these linkages through the systematic study of the size, composition and distribution of populations and their relationship to the social, political and economic organization of societies.  This course will pay particular attention to mortality, morbidity and health, fertility, family and household organization, and migration as the major processes of population change.  The population dynamics of the United States will be emphasized, with select comparisons to developing and developed countries. Offered as SOCI 377 and SOCI 477. Prereq: SOCI 101 or equivalent; 9 hours in SOCI, ANTH, or ECON.
SOCI 484	Sociology of Sex(es), Gender(s) and Sexuality(ies)	3 Units	Gender is an organizing principle of society and affects every element of social life. Ideas about gender and sexuality shape identity and suffuse interactions, institutions and the societies within which we live. These ideas vary from individual to individual, but also across time and place. This course surveys research on sex, gender and sexuality with the goal of providing students with a theoretical grounding for analyzing sex, gender and sexuality from a sociological perspective. We will explore outdated theories like essentialism and biological determinism, and newer theories rooted in social constructionism. Central to this course is intersectionality, a theoretical perspective that reveals ways in which race/ethnicity, class, gender, sexuality and other social categories are inextricably connected and form interlocking systems of inequality. Additional topics to be explored include: the sexual revolution, the hook-up culture, gendered families, gendered health, occupational segregation, sexual harassment and gendered violence, reproduction, social change and feminist activism. Offered as SOCI 384, SOCI 484, and WGST 384.
SOCI 485	Ethnography	3 Units	The course will be taught twice weekly as a seminar for upper level undergraduate students and graduate students, and will examine some of the key debates in ethnography, read ethnographies published as both books and articles, and explore various ways of designing ethnographic fieldwork. Offered as SOCI 385 and SOCI 485.
SOCI 486	Race and Racism	3 Units	Race and Racism will discuss the classical and contemporary understandings of the concepts of race and racism. We will begin by taking an historical approach, delving into processes of racialization and the first instances where distinctions in human race were noted. We will survey theories of race and use a social constructions approach to examine how sociologists approach the study of racial and ethnic group difference. We will examine how definitions of racial groups have evolved over time and differ across contexts, as well as some of the underlying social and structural processes that create racial hierarchies. At the end of the course students should have a strong understanding of the mechanisms that reproduce systems of racial classification. The course will also examine patterns and trends in racial and ethnic inequality over recent decades, centering our discussion on the legacies of racism, current discrimination, and new processes that are currently unfolding to reproduce inequality.While the course's main focus is to examine understandings of race and racism in the United States, we will devote some attention to how race and ethnicity emerge in different environments by examining race and racism in an international context. Offered as AFST 386, SOCI 386 and SOCI 486. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SOCI 509	Advanced Statistical Analysis	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to teach students multivariate data analysis, including linear regression, logistic regression, and econometric models.  Students will learn about issues in data management such as variable measurement and techniques for handling missing data.  Students also learn to select appropriate statistical models, design the analysis, and assess model fit.  The course includes hands-on instruction with computer labs. Prereq: SOCI 407 and SOCI 406 or requisites not met permission.
SOCI 514	Qualitative Methods/Field Research	3 Units	Students explore the theoretical foundations of qualitative social research.  The course is designed to introduce and provide experience with a range of data generation strategies and analytic skills.  The ethnographic techniques of semi-structured interviewing and participant-observation receive particular attention.
SOCI 525	Multilevel Modeling	3 Units	This course is designed to provide an introduction to multilevel, or hierarchical, regression models, and to explore its two primary applications in the social sciences:  (1) studies of individuals nested within groups; (2) studies of repeated observations nested within individuals.  After taking this course, students should be able to discuss the components of the multilevel model, including random intercepts & slopes, variances at levels 1 & 2, within- and between-group regressions.  Students should also be able to conduct independent statistical analysis using Stata from initial tests of assumptions and hypothesis testing, and to assessing model fit.  This course will additionally provide instruction on time-based and age-based latent growth curves within the multilevel modeling framework. Prereq: SOCI 509 or requisites not met permission.
SOCI 601	Reading and Research	1 - 9 Units	Individual study and/or project work.
SOCI 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
SPAN 101	Elementary Spanish I	4 Units	This course is for students who wish to establish a solid foundation in the language. Open to students who have little or no prior knowledge of Spanish. The course will introduce the learner to all regular, stem-changing and irregular verbs. In addition, the comparison of ser v estar, saber v conocer, tener with noun expressions, emotional and mental states and prepositions of location. Students will learn the mechanics of pronoun usage; reflexive, direct object, indirect object and double object pronouns. Lexical expressions, useful vocabulary, nouns, adverbs and adjectives will be acquired via themed chapters. Cultural topics are also explored, providing a glimpse into the daily life of Spanish-speaking countries.  This course concludes with learning the past tense forms: preterit and imperfect. Upon completion of the course, the student will be able to master basic conversation, listening, reading comprehension and writing skills related to everyday life, including appreciation and awareness of Hispanic multiculturalism.
SPAN 101H	Spanish for Health Care	4 Units	This course is an introductory language course teaching the basic covered in SPAN 101 with a particular emphasis on health care topics and vocabulary. Students will gain familiarity with basic vocabulary and basic grammatical structures for communication with and assessment of Spanish speaking patients in a variety of settings. No previous experience with the Spanish language is required.  After successfully completing this course students will be eligible to continue to SPAN 102.
SPAN 102	Elementary Spanish II	4 Units	This is a course for students who have a solid foundation in the language and who wish to advance their grammar. This is a course open to students who have mastered the topics outlined in SPAN 101, or for students who successfully completed 101 at CWRU. This course is a continuation of 101, and begins with an in-depth comparison of preterit and imperfect during the first few weeks. SPAN 102 will go on to cover all other indicative verb forms such as the imperative, future, present perfect, conditional and pluperfect. The subjunctive mood is also explored in depth; both present and imperfect subjunctive. A variety of cultural topics will help the student develop a stronger appreciation of Hispanic society and multiculturalism. Lexical expressions and useful vocabulary will be acquired via themed chapters. Upon completion of this course, the student will be able to read, write, listen and speak Spanish with reasonable accuracy on a wider variety of everyday topics within the indicative and subjunctive moods. Prereq: SPAN 101 or SPAN 101H.
SPAN 201	Intermediate Spanish I	4 Units	This course is an intermediate language course with a focus on advanced grammar and conversation. The student must be equipped with a fair amount of grammatical proficiency that includes knowing the simple verb tenses of the present, future, and past tenses of the indicative mood, along with the present and imperfect subjunctive. This course will introduce the learner to more advanced applications of these grammar topics. Along with other grammatical explorations, this course will help the student to critically think about real world topics such as familial, generational, and personal relationships, customs, traditions, and values, food and eating habits, leaders and politics, and contemporary society and technology. Students will develop better articulation of their opinions, perspectives and commentary in Spanish; both verbally and written. Students will acquire some knowledge and appreciation of Spanish-speaking authors and literature. This course will also explore the cultural traditions, customs and diversity shared by the people of countries in which Spanish is spoken. Students will also work on building confidence to deliver oral presentations in Spanish regarding different cultural topics. The course is taught completely in Spanish. Prereq: SPAN 102.
SPAN 202	Intermediate Spanish II	4 Units	This course is an intermediate language course with a focus on advanced grammar and conversation. The student must be equipped with a fair amount of grammatical proficiency that includes knowing the differences between preterit and imperfect, the indicative and subjunctive moods (both present and imperfect), conditional and future tenses and the imperative and present perfect. This course will introduce the learner to more advanced compound verb constructions such as the present perfect (both in the indicative and subjunctive) and the pluperfect, the future perfect, conditional perfect and pluperfect subjunctive. Students will learn how to accurately construct 'si clauses', the passive voice and 'se' constructions, as well as know the difference between resultant and passive states. Along with other advanced grammar topics, this course will help the student to critically think about real world topics such as film and entertainment, work and finances, urban and rural life, music, musical instruments and literature. Students will develop better articulation of their opinions, perspectives and commentary in Spanish; both verbally and written. The course will also explore the cultural traditions, customs and diversity shared by the people of countries in which Spanish is spoken. Students will acquire some knowledge and appreciation of Spanish-speaking authors and literature, while learning the differences between narrative, biographical, argumentative and descriptive texts. This course will also help students to build confidence to deliver oral presentations in Spanish regarding different cultural topics. The course is taught completely in Spanish. Prereq: SPAN 201.
SPAN 301	Multicultural Spain	Christian, Jewish and Muslim Coexistence	3 Units	Why is Medieval Iberia so often depicted as an example of tolerant multiculturalism? What constituted tolerance in the Middle Ages?  In what sense can we speak of medieval multiculturalism? Is Americo Castro's optimistic model of convivencia (coexistence) valid, or is Brian Catlos' idea of conveniencia (convenience) more accurate? In this course we will study cultural theory, medieval and modern historiography, and literature from medieval Castile to the present to approach an understanding of Medieval Iberian 'multiculturalism.'   This class will allow students to get in contact with the history of Spain through the study of the presence and influence of the Roman Empire, the Jewish and Muslim cultures and religions in the Peninsula. Through literature, cinema and art students will learn how the Spanish civilization and culture developed through the years.  The class will be offered during a regular semester, with a study abroad component at the end of it. Students will receive a handout about how to prepare for the class abroad. Offered as ARAB 303 and RLGN 303 and SPAN 301. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SPAN 305	Spanish for Political Science and International Relations	3 Units	Spanish 305 is an upper-level Spanish language course designed to give students interested in political science and international relations specific field-related vocabulary and cultural information not found in basic textbooks.  The course is divided into two parts: the first deals with political science; the second with international relations.  Readings, discussions, and lectures are conducted in Spanish. Prereq: SPAN 202 or requisites not met permission.
SPAN 306	The Cuban Experience: an immersion in its culture and society	3 Units	This is a three-week study-abroad intensive course that takes place in Matanzas and Havana, Cuba. The course combines the unique advantages of a total immersion environment in the Cuban culture with a classroom curriculum that includes the study of relevant cultural, literary and historical issues. Students complete three hours of classroom instruction and an hour and a half of workshop four days per week. Also, they participate in organized visits to historic sites and museums connected to the culture curriculum. The focus of the culture curriculum is the study of Cuban history and culture through its literature, visual arts, films, and music. After applying and being accepted into the program, students meet for personal advising with the program director and attend four different one-hour orientation-information meetings in the spring semester. After successful completion of the study-abroad program, students receive three upper-level credits in Spanish or Ethnic Studies. The course is interdisciplinary in its approach and provides students with the tools they need to analyze and understand the complexities of modern Cuba.  Students will have formal classes taught by their professor and talks, and meetings with specialists on Cuban literature, art, architecture, history and other aspects of culture and society. Also, they will attend lectures, participate in discussions, and take field trips that will expose them to many aspects of Cuban culture, such as art, architecture, music, dance, film, literature, artisan work, folklore, history and urban growth. Offered as SPAN 306, SPAN 406, and ETHS 306. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SPAN 308	Advanced Spanish in Spain	3 Units	Three week study-abroad intensive course that takes place in Valladolid, Spain.  The course combines the unique advantages of a total immersion environment in Spanish with a classroom curriculum that includes grammar review, conversation practice, and study of relevant cultural issues.  The focus of the culture curriculum is the study of Spain's key historical moments through the city of Valladolid and nearby communities: their literature, visual arts, films, and music.  The cultural component is enhanced by visits to historic and cultural sites and museums.  Four different one-hour orientation meetings during Spring semester. Prereq: SPAN 202 or equivalent.
SPAN 310	Advanced Composition and Reading	3 Units	Designed to facilitate the transition between lower and upper division courses in Spanish, and focus upon the simultaneous development of the reading and writing skills expected of students in all advanced Spanish courses. Prereq: SPAN 202.
SPAN 311	Advanced Spanish Conversation	3 Units	Engages students in conversation so that they develop oral proficiency. Short essays and newspaper articles dealing with everyday activities, socio-cultural roles and experiences, and self-awareness and life goals discussed; some literary materials discussed. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 202.
SPAN 312	Business Spanish	3 Units	Spanish for business is an upper-level language and culture course which is designed for students at the advance intermediate level.  The course stresses the vocabulary and expressions used to describe economic and commercial structure, the language to solve problems and conduct negotiations, and the culture of specific aspects of the Spanish world of the business.  Students will continue being exposed to listening, speaking, reading and writing through a variety of activities. Prereq: SPAN 202 or permission.
SPAN 313	Spanish for Health Professionals	3 Units	Designed for students who are majoring in, or considering a major in, a health-related field.  Focus on the vocabulary and expressions needed for the workplace, task-based practical skills, and grammatical structures. Prereq: SPAN 202 or equivalent.
SPAN 314	Practice of Translation	3 Units	Students learn necessary skills and techniques for solving linguistic problems in translation. Texts with a variety of contents, including articles from current press, will be translated from English into Spanish and occasionally from Spanish into English. Prereq: SPAN 202.
SPAN 315	Latin American Cultural Conflicts	3 Units	Evolution of Latin American socioeconomic characteristics and artistic production up to the present. Class discussions of diverse literary works, social research essays, and testimonials focus on conflicting elements in class structures, ethnicity, and urban modernization as well as family ethos, religious trends, cultural identity, and educational problems. Offered as SPAN 315 and SPAN 415. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 202.
SPAN 317	Contemporary Latin American Culture	3 Units	An intensive study of Latin American culture and civilization through the examination of its arts: literature, music, film, painting, photography, popular art. Designed to bring together the various strands of Latin American realities, emphasis is placed on the predominant view among Latin American intellectuals that artists and intellectuals have the power and the obligation to modify society. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 202.
SPAN 318	Contemporary Spanish Culture	3 Units	Study of several key historical moments and several key aspects in contemporary Spain: Spanish civil war, Franco's dictatorship, and democratic Spain; rural-urban differences, industrialization and migratory movements; nationalism and terrorism; foreign immigration and tourism, the cultural renaissance and the cultural wars in Madrid and Barcelona. Feature films and literary texts will illustrate the issues under study. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 202.
SPAN 320	Introduction to Readings in Hispanic Literature	3 Units	Introduction to major literary movements and genres, and the works of outstanding authors of Spanish and Latin American literature through close readings and seminar-based discussions of the texts, as well as to disciplinary modes of inquiry and presentation.  Requirements include active participation in seminar discussions, oral presentations, tests, and several written assignments, such as response papers, in-class writing exercises, and an analytic essay in Spanish on a research topic of interest to the discipline. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 202.
SPAN 322	Latin American Short Story	3 Units	The history and development of the Latin American short story from the nineteenth century to the present. Intertextuality, rise of the Nuevo Cuento, and major characteristics of the works. Offered as SPAN 322 and SPAN 422. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 320.
SPAN 326	The Fantastic in Latin American Prose	3 Units	Introduction to a distinctive trend in contemporary Latin American literature, the prose portrayal of the "fantastic," a new narrative mode in Latin America. Critical examination of selected texts reveals new concepts of space and time and an increasing complexity of structure and style, one which juxtaposes and analyzes fantasy and reality. Offered as SPAN 326 and SPAN 426. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 320.
SPAN 331	Spanish Golden Age Literature	3 Units	Through close reading and discussion of representative texts, we will study different examples of Spanish and Latin American writing from the Middle Ages, Renaissance and Baroque periods. We will stress connections between Spain and Latin America, as well as cultural and literary topics of special relevance for contemporary Hispanic cultures. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 320.
SPAN 333	Contemporary Caribbean Literature	3 Units	In addition to developing a general familiarity with the literature and history of this region, students will acquire an awareness of the interrelation of national identity, memory, and language in the texts produced by contemporary Caribbean authors, and of the cultural hybridity characteristic of this production. The themes treated by these authors include colonialism and postcolonialism, cultural and religious syncretism, and sexual politics. Offered as SPAN 333, SPAN 433, and ETHS 333. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 320.
SPAN 334	Mexican Literature	3 Units	The course studies, through a series of representative literary works, the most significant literary movements and styles in 20th and 21st Centuries Mexican Literature.  Special attention will be paid to the political, aesthetic, and philosophical debates that have shaped the development of Mexican literature from the 1920s to the present, and to the different narrative techniques and ideologies that have characterized different historical periods, literary movements, and individual authors' styles in contemporary Mexican literature. Offered as SPAN 334 and SPAN 434. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 320.
SPAN 340	Contemporary Latin-American Narrative	3 Units	Students explore the most significant narrative techniques since 1945 in Latin American fiction: Borges, Cortazar, Garcia Marquez, Vargas Llosa, Isabel Allende. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 320.
SPAN 342	Latin American Feminist Voices	3 Units	Examination of the awakening of feminine and feminist consciousness in the literary production of Latin American women writers, particularly from the 1920s to the present.  Close attention paid to the dominant themes of love and dependency; imagination as evasion; alienation and rebellion; sexuality and power; the search for identity and the self-preservation of subjectivity.  Readings include prose, poetry, and dramatic texts of female Latin American writers contributing to the emerging of feminist ideologies and the mapping of feminist identities. Offered as SPAN 342, SPAN 442, ETHS 342, and WGST 342. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 320.
SPAN 343	The New Drama in Latin American	3 Units	Representative works of contemporary Latin American drama. Critical examination of selected dramatic works of twentieth-century Latin America provides students insight into the nature of drama and into the structural and stylistic strategies utilized by Latin American dramatists to create the "new theater," one which is closely related to Latin American political history. Offered as SPAN 343, SPAN 443 and ETHS 343. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 320.
SPAN 345	Hispanic Autobiographical Writing	3 Units	The course studies issues of self-representation through the reading of autobiographical works from different periods from Latin America, Spain, and the U.S., and of theoretical works that address topics of first-person narratives, autobiography, and sub-alternity. Satisfies Global and Cultural Diversity requirement. Offered as SPAN 345 and SPAN 445. Prereq: SPAN 320.
SPAN 350	Spanish Fiction	3 Units	Narrative masterpieces from Cervantes and the picaresque (El Lazarillo) to the short stories and novels of 20th and 21st Century authors. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 320.
SPAN 351	Hispanic Turn of the Century Literature	3 Units	Cultural and political transitions between 19th and 20th Centuries, between Spain and Latin America, and between literary models. Study of Spanish and Latin American writers and their literary connections (Generation of 1898, modernistas) in the context of colonial conflicts and economic changes. Offered as SPAN 351 and SPAN 451. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 320.
SPAN 356	Afro-Hispanic Literature	3 Units	This course will survey the literary and cultural production of writers and artists of African descent in Latin America and the Caribbean, paying attention to both their creative and theoretical texts.  Discussion of questions of race and ethnicity will allow students to explore the ways in which these texts reformulate the idea of national identity and cultural belonging in the context of the nation-state, whose traditional centrality is being weakened through the effects of migration and exile.  Readings include works by writers from Cuba, Puerto Rico, Dominican Republic, Costa Rica, Colombia, Panama, Ecuador, and Peru. Offered as SPAN 356, SPAN 456 and ETHS 356. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 320.
SPAN 358	Latin American Cinema	3 Units	This course is designed to introduce students to the basic tools of film analysis as well as to the major trends and movements in Latin American cinema from the 1960s to the present.  Through the analysis of representative films from Latin America, the course will examine the development of a variety of cinematic styles, paying particular attention to the historical contexts in which the films were produced and to the political, cultural, and aesthetic debates that surrounded their production. Offered as SPAN 358, SPAN 458 and ETHS 358. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 320 or equivalent.
SPAN 385	Hispanic Literature in Translation	3 Units	Critical analysis and appreciation of representative literary masterpieces from Spain and Latin America, and by Hispanics living in the U.S. Texts cover a variety of genres and a range of literary periods, from works by Cervantes to those of Gabriel Garcia Marquez. The course will examine the relationship between literature and other forms of artistic production, as well as the development of the Hispanic literary text within the context of historical events and cultural production of the period. Counts toward Spanish major only as related course. No knowledge of Spanish required. Offered as ETHS 385, ETHS 485,  SPAN 385,  SPAN 485,  WLIT 385, and WLIT 485. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SPAN 396	Senior Capstone - Spanish	3 Units	The Senior Capstone in Spanish in an independent study project chosen in consultation with a capstone advisor.  The capstone project should reflect both the student's interest within Spanish and the courses he or she has taken to fulfill the major.  The project requires independent research using an approved bibliography and plan of action.  In addition to written research, the student will also present the capstone project in a public forum that is agreed upon by the project advisor and the student. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Senior status required. Major in Spanish required.
SPAN 397	Honors Thesis I	3 Units	Intensive study of a literary, linguistic, or cultural topic with a faculty member, leading to the writing of a research paper in Spanish. Limited to senior majors. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SPAN 398	Honors Thesis II	3 Units	Continuation of SPAN 397. Limited to senior majors. Permit required. Prereq: SPAN 397.
SPAN 399	Independent Study	1 - 3 Units	The course is for students with special interests and commitments that are not fully addressed in regular courses, and who wish to work independently.
SPAN 406	The Cuban Experience: an immersion in its culture and society	3 Units	This is a three-week study-abroad intensive course that takes place in Matanzas and Havana, Cuba. The course combines the unique advantages of a total immersion environment in the Cuban culture with a classroom curriculum that includes the study of relevant cultural, literary and historical issues. Students complete three hours of classroom instruction and an hour and a half of workshop four days per week. Also, they participate in organized visits to historic sites and museums connected to the culture curriculum. The focus of the culture curriculum is the study of Cuban history and culture through its literature, visual arts, films, and music. After applying and being accepted into the program, students meet for personal advising with the program director and attend four different one-hour orientation-information meetings in the spring semester. After successful completion of the study-abroad program, students receive three upper-level credits in Spanish or Ethnic Studies. The course is interdisciplinary in its approach and provides students with the tools they need to analyze and understand the complexities of modern Cuba.  Students will have formal classes taught by their professor and talks, and meetings with specialists on Cuban literature, art, architecture, history and other aspects of culture and society. Also, they will attend lectures, participate in discussions, and take field trips that will expose them to many aspects of Cuban culture, such as art, architecture, music, dance, film, literature, artisan work, folklore, history and urban growth. Offered as SPAN 306, SPAN 406, and ETHS 306. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 202.
SPAN 415	Latin American Cultural Conflicts	3 Units	Evolution of Latin American socioeconomic characteristics and artistic production up to the present. Class discussions of diverse literary works, social research essays, and testimonials focus on conflicting elements in class structures, ethnicity, and urban modernization as well as family ethos, religious trends, cultural identity, and educational problems. Offered as SPAN 315 and SPAN 415. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SPAN 422	Latin American Short Story	3 Units	The history and development of the Latin American short story from the nineteenth century to the present. Intertextuality, rise of the Nuevo Cuento, and major characteristics of the works. Offered as SPAN 322 and SPAN 422. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SPAN 426	The Fantastic in Latin American Prose	3 Units	Introduction to a distinctive trend in contemporary Latin American literature, the prose portrayal of the "fantastic," a new narrative mode in Latin America. Critical examination of selected texts reveals new concepts of space and time and an increasing complexity of structure and style, one which juxtaposes and analyzes fantasy and reality. Offered as SPAN 326 and SPAN 426. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SPAN 433	Contemporary Caribbean Literature	3 Units	In addition to developing a general familiarity with the literature and history of this region, students will acquire an awareness of the interrelation of national identity, memory, and language in the texts produced by contemporary Caribbean authors, and of the cultural hybridity characteristic of this production. The themes treated by these authors include colonialism and postcolonialism, cultural and religious syncretism, and sexual politics. Offered as SPAN 333, SPAN 433, and ETHS 333. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SPAN 434	Mexican Literature	3 Units	The course studies, through a series of representative literary works, the most significant literary movements and styles in 20th and 21st Centuries Mexican Literature.  Special attention will be paid to the political, aesthetic, and philosophical debates that have shaped the development of Mexican literature from the 1920s to the present, and to the different narrative techniques and ideologies that have characterized different historical periods, literary movements, and individual authors' styles in contemporary Mexican literature. Offered as SPAN 334 and SPAN 434. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 320
SPAN 442	Latin American Feminist Voices	3 Units	Examination of the awakening of feminine and feminist consciousness in the literary production of Latin American women writers, particularly from the 1920s to the present.  Close attention paid to the dominant themes of love and dependency; imagination as evasion; alienation and rebellion; sexuality and power; the search for identity and the self-preservation of subjectivity.  Readings include prose, poetry, and dramatic texts of female Latin American writers contributing to the emerging of feminist ideologies and the mapping of feminist identities. Offered as SPAN 342, SPAN 442, ETHS 342, and WGST 342. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SPAN 443	The New Drama in Latin American	3 Units	Representative works of contemporary Latin American drama. Critical examination of selected dramatic works of twentieth-century Latin America provides students insight into the nature of drama and into the structural and stylistic strategies utilized by Latin American dramatists to create the "new theater," one which is closely related to Latin American political history. Offered as SPAN 343, SPAN 443 and ETHS 343. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SPAN 445	Hispanic Autobiographical Writing	3 Units	The course studies issues of self-representation through the reading of autobiographical works from different periods from Latin America, Spain, and the U.S., and of theoretical works that address topics of first-person narratives, autobiography, and sub-alternity. Satisfies Global and Cultural Diversity requirement. Offered as SPAN 345 and SPAN 445. Prereq: SPAN 320.
SPAN 451	Hispanic Turn of the Century Literature	3 Units	Cultural and political transitions between 19th and 20th Centuries, between Spain and Latin America, and between literary models. Study of Spanish and Latin American writers and their literary connections (Generation of 1898, modernistas) in the context of colonial conflicts and economic changes. Offered as SPAN 351 and SPAN 451. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SPAN 456	Afro-Hispanic Literature	3 Units	This course will survey the literary and cultural production of writers and artists of African descent in Latin America and the Caribbean, paying attention to both their creative and theoretical texts.  Discussion of questions of race and ethnicity will allow students to explore the ways in which these texts reformulate the idea of national identity and cultural belonging in the context of the nation-state, whose traditional centrality is being weakened through the effects of migration and exile.  Readings include works by writers from Cuba, Puerto Rico, Dominican Republic, Costa Rica, Colombia, Panama, Ecuador, and Peru. Offered as SPAN 356, SPAN 456 and ETHS 356. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SPAN 458	Latin American Cinema	3 Units	This course is designed to introduce students to the basic tools of film analysis as well as to the major trends and movements in Latin American cinema from the 1960s to the present.  Through the analysis of representative films from Latin America, the course will examine the development of a variety of cinematic styles, paying particular attention to the historical contexts in which the films were produced and to the political, cultural, and aesthetic debates that surrounded their production. Offered as SPAN 358, SPAN 458 and ETHS 358. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
SPAN 485	Hispanic Literature in Translation	3 Units	Critical analysis and appreciation of representative literary masterpieces from Spain and Latin America, and by Hispanics living in the U.S. Texts cover a variety of genres and a range of literary periods, from works by Cervantes to those of Gabriel Garcia Marquez. The course will examine the relationship between literature and other forms of artistic production, as well as the development of the Hispanic literary text within the context of historical events and cultural production of the period. Counts toward Spanish major only as related course. No knowledge of Spanish required. Offered as ETHS 385, ETHS 485,  SPAN 385,  SPAN 485,  WLIT 385, and WLIT 485. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Graduate standing.
SPAN 499	Graduate Independent Study	3 Units	This class will fulfill the requirement of graduate students who need to complete their course-loud focusing on specific topics related to their fields of study.
STAT 201	Basic Statistics for Social and Life Sciences	3 Units	Designed for undergraduates in the social sciences and life sciences who need to use statistical techniques in their fields. Descriptive statistics, probability models, sampling distributions. Point and confidence interval estimation, hypothesis testing. Elementary regression and analysis of variance.  Not for credit toward major or minor in Statistics. Counts for CAS Quantitative Reasoning Requirement.
STAT 243	Statistical Theory with Application I	3 Units	Introduction to fundamental concepts of statistics through examples including design of an observational study, industrial simulation. Theoretical development motivated by sample survey methodology.  Randomness, distribution functions, conditional probabilities.  Derivation of common discrete distributions. Expectation operator.  Statistics as random variables, point and interval estimation.  Maximum likelihood estimators.  Properties of estimators. Prereq: MATH 122 or MATH 126.
STAT 244	Statistical Theory with Application II	3 Units	Extension of inferences to continuous-valued random variables. Common continuous-valued distributions. Expectation operator. Maximum likelihood estimators for the continuous case. Simple linear, multiple and polynomial regression. Properties of regression estimators when errors are Gaussian. Regression diagnostics. Class or student projects gathering real data or generating simulated data, fitting models and analyzing residuals from fit. Prereq: STAT 243.
STAT 312	Basic Statistics for Engineering and Science	3 Units	For advanced undergraduate students in engineering, physical sciences, life sciences. Comprehensive introduction to probability models and statistical methods of analyzing data with the object of formulating statistical models and choosing appropriate methods for inference from experimental and observational data and for testing the model's validity. Balanced approach with equal emphasis on probability, fundamental concepts of statistics, point and interval estimation, hypothesis testing, analysis of variance, design of experiments, and regression modeling.  Note: Credit given for only one (1) of STAT 312, 312R, 313; SYBB 312R. Prereq: MATH 122 or equivalent.
STAT 312R	Basic Statistics for Engineering and Science Using R Programming	3 Units	For advanced undergraduate students in engineering, physical sciences, life sciences. Comprehensive introduction to probability models and statistical methods of analyzing data with the object of formulating statistical models and choosing appropriate methods for inference from experimental and observational data and for testing the model's validity. Balanced approach with equal emphasis on probability, fundamental concepts of statistics, point and interval estimation, hypothesis testing, analysis of variance, design of experiments, and regression modeling.  Note: Credit given for only one (1) of STAT 312, STAT 312R, STAT 313 or SYBB 312R.   Offered as STAT 312R and SYBB 312R. Prereq: MATH 122 or equivalent.
STAT 313	Statistics for Experimenters	3 Units	For advanced undergraduates in engineering, physical sciences, life sciences. Comprehensive introduction to modeling data and statistical methods of analyzing data.  General objective is to train students in formulating statistical models, in choosing appropriate methods for inference from experimental and observational data and to test the validity of these models.  Focus on practicalities of inference from experimental data.  Inference for curve and surface fitting to real data sets.  Designs for experiments and simulations.  Student generation of experimental data and application of statistical methods for analysis. Critique of model; use of regression diagnostics to analyze errors. Note: Credit given for only one (1) of STAT 312, 312R,  313; SYBB 312R. Prereq: MATH 122 or equivalent.
STAT 317	Actuarial Science I	3 Units	Practical knowledge of the theory of interest in both finite and continuous time. That knowledge should include how these concepts are used in the various annuity functions, and apply the concepts of present and accumulated value for various streams of cash flows as a basis for future use in: reserving, valuation, pricing, duration, asset/liability management, investment income, capital budgeting, and contingencies. Valuation of discrete and continuous streams of payments, including the case in which the interest conversion period differs from the payment period will be considered. Application of interest theory to amortization of lump sums, fixed income securities, depreciation, mortgages, etc., as well as annuity functions in a broad finance context will be covered. Topics covered include areas examined in the American Society of Actuaries Exam 2.  Offered as STAT 317 and STAT 417. Prereq: MATH 122 or MATH 126 or requisites not met permission.
STAT 318	Actuarial Science II	3 Units	Theory of life contingencies. Life table analysis for simple and multiple decrement functions. Life and special annuities. Life insurance and reserves for life insurance. Statistical issues for prediction from actuarial models. Topics covered include areas examined in the American Society of Actuaries Exam 3.   Offered as STAT 318 and STAT 418. Prereq: STAT 312 or STAT 312R or STAT 317 or STAT 345 or Requisites Not Met permission.
STAT 325	Data Analysis and Linear Models	3 Units	Basic exploratory data analysis for univariate response with single or multiple covariates. Graphical methods and data summarization, model-fitting using S-plus computing language. Linear and multiple regression.  Emphasis on model selection criteria, on diagnostics to assess goodness of fit and interpretation.  Techniques include transformation, smoothing, median polish, robust/resistant methods.  Case studies and analysis of individual data sets.  Notes of caution and some methods for handling bad data.  Knowledge of regression is helpful. Offered as STAT 325 and STAT 425. Prereq: STAT 243 or STAT 312 or STAT 312R or PQHS 431 or PQHS 458.
STAT 326	Multivariate Analysis and Data Mining	3 Units	Extensions of exploratory data analysis and modeling to multivariate response observations and to non-Gaussian data. Singular value decomposition and projection, principal components, factor analysis and latent structure analysis, discriminant analysis and clustering techniques, cross-validation, E-M algorithm, CART.  Introduction to generalized linear modeling.  Case studies of complex data sets with multiple objectives for analysis. Recommended preparation: STAT 325/425. Offered as STAT 326 and STAT 426.
STAT 332	Statistics for Signal Processing	3 Units	For advanced undergraduate students or beginning graduate students in engineering, physical sciences, life sciences. Introduction to probability models and statistical methods. Emphasis on probability as relative frequencies. Derivation of conditional probabilities and memoryless channels. Joint distribution of random variables, transformations, autocorrelation, series of irregular observations, stationarity. Random harmonic signals with noise, random phase and/or random amplitude. Gaussian and Poisson signals. Modulation and averaging properties. Transmission through linear filters. Power spectra, bandwidth, white and colored noise. ARMA processes and forecasting. Optimal linear systems, signal-to-noise ratio, Wiener filter. Completion of additional assignments required from graduate students registered in this course. Offered as STAT 332 and STAT 432. Prereq: MATH 122.
STAT 333	Uncertainty in Engineering and Science	3 Units	Phenomena of uncertainty appear in engineering and science for various reasons and can be modeled in different ways. The course integrates the mainstream ideas in statistical data analysis with models of uncertain phenomena stemming from three distinct viewpoints: algorithmic/computational complexity; classical probability theory; and chaotic behavior of nonlinear systems. Descriptive statistics, estimation procedures and hypothesis testing (including design of experiments). Random number generators and their testing.  Monte Carlo Methods.  Mathematica notebooks and simulations will be used. Graduate students are required to do an extra project. Offered as STAT 333 and STAT 433. Prereq: MATH 122 or MATH 223.
STAT 345	Theoretical Statistics I	3 Units	Topics provide the background for statistical inference. Random variables; distribution and density functions; transformations, expectation. Common univariate distributions. Multiple random variables; joint, marginal and conditional distributions; hierarchical models, covariance. Distributions of sample quantities, distributions of sums of random variables, distributions of order statistics. Methods of statistical inference. Offered as STAT 345, STAT 445, and PQHS 481. Prereq: MATH 122 or MATH 223 or Coreq: PQHS 431.
STAT 346	Theoretical Statistics II	3 Units	Point estimation: maximum likelihood, moment estimators.  Methods of evaluating estimators including mean squared error, consistency, "best" unbiased and sufficiency.  Hypothesis testing; likelihood ratio and union-intersection tests.  Properties of tests including power function, bias.  Interval estimation by inversion of test statistics, use of pivotal quantities.  Application to regression.  Graduate students are responsible for mathematical derivations, and full proofs of principal theorems. Offered as STAT 346, STAT 446 and  PQHS 482. Prereq: STAT 345 or STAT 445 or PQHS 481.
STAT 382	High Dimensional Probability	3 Units	Behavior of random vectors, random matrices, and random projections in high dimensional spaces, with a view toward applications to data sciences.  Topics include tail inequalities for sums of independent random variables, norms of random matrices, concentration of measure, and bounds for random processes. Applications may include structure of random graphs, community detection, covariance estimation and clustering, randomized dimension reduction, empirical processes, statistical learning, and sparse recovery problems.  Additional work is required for graduate students. Offered as MATH 382, MATH 482, STAT 382 and STAT 482. Prereq: MATH 307 and (MATH 380 or STAT 345 or STAT 445).
STAT 395	Senior Project in Statistics	3 Units	An individual project done under faculty supervision involving the investigation and statistical analysis of a real problem encountered in university research or an industrial setting. Written report. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
STAT 417	Actuarial Science I	3 Units	Practical knowledge of the theory of interest in both finite and continuous time. That knowledge should include how these concepts are used in the various annuity functions, and apply the concepts of present and accumulated value for various streams of cash flows as a basis for future use in: reserving, valuation, pricing, duration, asset/liability management, investment income, capital budgeting, and contingencies. Valuation of discrete and continuous streams of payments, including the case in which the interest conversion period differs from the payment period will be considered. Application of interest theory to amortization of lump sums, fixed income securities, depreciation, mortgages, etc., as well as annuity functions in a broad finance context will be covered. Topics covered include areas examined in the American Society of Actuaries Exam 2.  Offered as STAT 317 and STAT 417. Prereq: MATH 122 or MATH 126 or requisites not met permission.
STAT 418	Actuarial Science II	3 Units	Theory of life contingencies. Life table analysis for simple and multiple decrement functions. Life and special annuities. Life insurance and reserves for life insurance. Statistical issues for prediction from actuarial models. Topics covered include areas examined in the American Society of Actuaries Exam 3.   Offered as STAT 318 and STAT 418. Prereq: STAT 312 or STAT 312R or STAT 317 or STAT 345 or Requisites Not Met permission.
STAT 425	Data Analysis and Linear Models	3 Units	Basic exploratory data analysis for univariate response with single or multiple covariates. Graphical methods and data summarization, model-fitting using S-plus computing language. Linear and multiple regression.  Emphasis on model selection criteria, on diagnostics to assess goodness of fit and interpretation.  Techniques include transformation, smoothing, median polish, robust/resistant methods.  Case studies and analysis of individual data sets.  Notes of caution and some methods for handling bad data.  Knowledge of regression is helpful. Offered as STAT 325 and STAT 425.
STAT 426	Multivariate Analysis and Data Mining	3 Units	Extensions of exploratory data analysis and modeling to multivariate response observations and to non-Gaussian data. Singular value decomposition and projection, principal components, factor analysis and latent structure analysis, discriminant analysis and clustering techniques, cross-validation, E-M algorithm, CART.  Introduction to generalized linear modeling.  Case studies of complex data sets with multiple objectives for analysis. Recommended preparation: STAT 325/425. Offered as STAT 326 and STAT 426.
STAT 432	Statistics for Signal Processing	3 Units	For advanced undergraduate students or beginning graduate students in engineering, physical sciences, life sciences. Introduction to probability models and statistical methods. Emphasis on probability as relative frequencies. Derivation of conditional probabilities and memoryless channels. Joint distribution of random variables, transformations, autocorrelation, series of irregular observations, stationarity. Random harmonic signals with noise, random phase and/or random amplitude. Gaussian and Poisson signals. Modulation and averaging properties. Transmission through linear filters. Power spectra, bandwidth, white and colored noise. ARMA processes and forecasting. Optimal linear systems, signal-to-noise ratio, Wiener filter. Completion of additional assignments required from graduate students registered in this course. Offered as STAT 332 and STAT 432. Prereq: MATH 122.
STAT 433	Uncertainty in Engineering and Science	3 Units	Phenomena of uncertainty appear in engineering and science for various reasons and can be modeled in different ways. The course integrates the mainstream ideas in statistical data analysis with models of uncertain phenomena stemming from three distinct viewpoints: algorithmic/computational complexity; classical probability theory; and chaotic behavior of nonlinear systems. Descriptive statistics, estimation procedures and hypothesis testing (including design of experiments). Random number generators and their testing.  Monte Carlo Methods.  Mathematica notebooks and simulations will be used. Graduate students are required to do an extra project. Offered as STAT 333 and STAT 433. Prereq: MATH 122 or MATH 223.
STAT 437	Stochastic Models: Time Series and Markov Chains	3 Units	Introduction to stochastic modeling of data. Emphasis on models and statistical analysis of data with a significant temporal and/or spatial structure.  This course will analyze time and space dependent random phenomena from two perspectives:  Stationary Time Series: Spectral representation of deterministic signals, autocorrelation.  Power spectra.  Transmission of stationary signals through linear filters. Optimal filter design, signal-to-noise ratio.  Gaussian signals and correlation matrices. Spectral representation and computer simulation of stationary signals.  Discrete Markov Chains:  Transition matrices, recurrences and the first step analysis.  Steady rate.  Recurrence and ergodicity, empirical averages.  Long run behavior, convergence to steady state.  Time to absorption.  Eigenvalues and nonhomogeneous Markov chains.  Introduction to Gibbs fields and Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC).  This course is related to STAT 538 but can be taken independently of it. Offered as: MATH 497 and STAT 437. Prereq: STAT 312 or STAT 313 or STAT 332 or STAT 333 or STAT 345 or MATH 380 or MATH 491 or (STAT 243 and 244) or Requisites Not Met permission.
STAT 439	Bayesian Scientific Computing	3 Units	This course will embed numerical methods into a Bayesian framework. The statistical framework will make it possible to integrate a prori information about the unknowns and the error in the data directly into the most efficient numerical methods. A lot of emphasis will be put on understanding the role of the priors, their encoding into fast numerical solvers, and how to translate qualitative or sample-based information--or lack thereof--into a numerical scheme. Confidence on computed results will also be discussed from a Bayesian perspective, at the light of the given data and a priori information. The course should be of interest to anyone working on signal and image processing statistics, numerical analysis and modeling. Recommended Preparation: MATH 431. Offered as MATH 439 and STAT 439.
STAT 445	Theoretical Statistics I	3 Units	Topics provide the background for statistical inference. Random variables; distribution and density functions; transformations, expectation. Common univariate distributions. Multiple random variables; joint, marginal and conditional distributions; hierarchical models, covariance. Distributions of sample quantities, distributions of sums of random variables, distributions of order statistics. Methods of statistical inference. Offered as STAT 345, STAT 445, and PQHS 481. Prereq: MATH 122 or MATH 223 or Coreq: PQHS 431.
STAT 446	Theoretical Statistics II	3 Units	Point estimation: maximum likelihood, moment estimators.  Methods of evaluating estimators including mean squared error, consistency, "best" unbiased and sufficiency.  Hypothesis testing; likelihood ratio and union-intersection tests.  Properties of tests including power function, bias.  Interval estimation by inversion of test statistics, use of pivotal quantities.  Application to regression.  Graduate students are responsible for mathematical derivations, and full proofs of principal theorems. Offered as STAT 346, STAT 446 and  PQHS 482. Prereq: STAT 345 or STAT 445 or PQHS 481.
STAT 448	Bayesian Theory with Applications	3 Units	Principles of Bayesian theory, methodology and applications. Methods for forming prior distributions using conjugate families, reference priors and empirically-based priors. Derivation of posterior and predictive distributions and their moments. Properties when common distributions such as binomial, normal or other exponential family distributions are used. Hierarchical models. Computational techniques including Markov chain, Monte Carlo and importance sampling. Extensive use of applications to illustrate concepts and methodology. Recommended preparation: STAT 445.
STAT 455	Linear Models	3 Units	Theory of least squares estimation, interval estimation and tests for models with normally distributed errors. Regression on dummy variables, analysis of variance and covariance. Variance components models. Model diagnostics. Robust regression. Analysis of longitudinal data. Prereq: MATH 201 and STAT 346 or STAT 446
STAT 482	High Dimensional Probability	3 Units	Behavior of random vectors, random matrices, and random projections in high dimensional spaces, with a view toward applications to data sciences.  Topics include tail inequalities for sums of independent random variables, norms of random matrices, concentration of measure, and bounds for random processes. Applications may include structure of random graphs, community detection, covariance estimation and clustering, randomized dimension reduction, empirical processes, statistical learning, and sparse recovery problems.  Additional work is required for graduate students. Offered as MATH 382, MATH 482, STAT 382 and STAT 482. Prereq: Graduate student standing.
STAT 495A	Consulting Forum	1 - 3 Units	This course unifies what students have learned in their course work to apply their knowledge in consulting. It recognizes the fact that the essence of the statistical profession is continuing interaction with practitioners in the sciences, engineering, medicine, economics, etc. The course presents the views of prominent experts in the field as obtained from the literature and other sources. The responsibilities of the consultant and the client are discussed. Sample consulting problems are presented and strategies for solving them are provided. Prereq: STAT 325 or STAT 425.
STAT 538	Stochastic Models: Diffusive Phenomena and Stochastic Differential Equations	3 Units	Introduction to stochastic modeling of data.  Emphasis on models and statistical analysis of data with significant temporal and/or spatial structure.  This course will analyze time and space dependent random phenomena from two perspectives: Brownian motion and diffusive processes: Classification of stochastic processes, finite dimensional distributions, random walks and their scaling limits, Brownian motion and its paths properties, general diffusive processes, Fokker-Planck-Kolmogorov equations, Poisson and point processes, heavy tail diffusions, Levy processes, tempered stable diffusions.  Stochastic calculus and stochastic differential equations: Wiener random integrals, mean-square theory, Brownian stochastic integrals and Ito formula, stochastic integrals for Levy processes, martingale property, basic theory and applications of stochastic differential equations.  This course is related to STAT 437 but can be taken independently of it. Offered as MATH 598 and STAT 538. Prereq: STAT 312 or equivalent.
STAT 601	Reading and Research	1 - 9 Units	Individual study and/or project work.
STAT 621	M.S. Research Project	1 - 9 Units	Completion of statistical design and/or analysis of a research project in a substantive field which requires substantial and/or nonstandard statistical techniques and which leads to results suitable for publication. Written project report must present the context of the research, justify the statistical methodology used, draw appropriate inferences and interpret these inferences in both statistical and substantive scientific terms. Oral presentation of research project may be given in either graduate student seminar or consulting forum.
STAT 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)  May be used as alternative to STAT 621 (M.S. Research Project) in fulfillment of requirements for M.S. degree in Statistics.
STAT 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
SCMG 400	Linear Algebra	1 Unit	The objective of this one-credit hour course is to provide a basic working knowledge of material in linear algebra that is relevant to the Master of Supply Chain Management and Master of Business Analytics & Intelligence programs. This background material includes geometric and algebraic properties of vectors and matrices together with operations that can be performed on them. The use of vectors and matrices in solving systems of linear equations is taught. Offered as BUAI 400 and SCMG 400. Prereq: For Master of Supply Chain Management students only.
SCMG 406	Operations Management	3 Units	Operations managers, ranging from supervisors to vice presidents, are concerned with the production of goods and services.  More specifically, they are responsible for designing, running, controlling and improving the systems that accomplish production.  This course is a broad-spectrum course with emphasis on techniques helpful to the practice of management at the analyst level.  Its goal is to introduce you to the environments, to help you appreciate the problems that operations managers are confronted with, and provide you with the tools to address these problems.  Operations Management spans all value-adding activities of an organization including product and process design, production, service delivery, distribution network and customer order management.  As global competition in both goods and services increases, a firm's survival depends upon how well it structures its operations to respond quickly to changing consumer needs.  Thus, it is essential for all business managers to acquire an understanding of operations management to maintain their competitive advantage.  This course provides students with the basic tools needed to become an analyst in Supply Chain and Operations Management.  This course provides an overview of Process analysis, Capacity management, Queuing system, analysis, Forecasting, Quality management, Material Requirements planning, Inventory management, and Supply Chain management.  The emphasis of the course is on both real world applications and technical problem solving.  Several manufacturing and non-manufacturing environments will be discussed explicitly, like health care, insurance, hotel-management, airlines and government related operations.  Also we will explore the interface of operations management with other functional areas such as marketing, finance, accounting, etc.  This coursework includes individual and group assignments, case analyses and experiential learning through simulations and educational games. Prereq: For Master of Supply Chain Management students only.
SCMG 411A	Optimization Analytics for Supply Chain	1.5 Unit	The objective of this course is to enable you to use mathematical models to help make better decisions for organizations, which a goal of the Master of Supply Chain Management program. General model building techniques are provided and illustrated with many Supply Chain decision problems. You will also learn to classify your model based on its mathematical properties so that you can identify an appropriate computer package to obtain the solution. Because of their importance, significant time is devoted to formulating linear programming models using a variety of examples. You will see how to obtain and interpret a solution from a computer package in EXCEL and how to use the associated output to answer "What-happens-if" questions that arise after solving the problem. You will also get an introduction to formulating and solving other optimization problems in the areas of integer programming, networks, combinatorial optimization, and nonlinear programming. The art of formulating problems, understanding what is involved in solving them, and obtaining and interpreting the solution from a computer package are shown. A comparison with linear programming problems is provided as a way of understanding the advantages and disadvantages of these other models and their solution procedures. Prereq: For Master of Supply Chain Management students only.
SCMG 420	Experiential Learning with Six Sigma Green Belt	3 Units	The Six Sigma process is the standard for quality improvement in organizations around the globe. In this course, we study the details of the five steps in the Six Sigma process: DEFINE, MEASURE, ANALYZE, IMPROVE, and CONTROL (DMAIC). Many tools, concepts, and processes that are often an integral part of Six Sigma projects in companies are included in the course content. They range from the very basic tools of quality (such as cause-and-effect diagrams for brainstorming) to complete processes (such as benchmarking, quality function deployment, failure mode and effects analysis-FMEA). Statistical concepts with software applications that are central to Six Sigma including statistical process control and introduction to design of experiments are also included. Once the Six Sigma process and its various components are understood, we study quality management including quality control, quality planning, quality improvement, strategic quality management, and quality strategy. A major requirement of the course is an action learning component in which the students are assigned in groups to work on unpaid real projects of Six Sigma in local industries. Students meeting the required standards of performance will earn a Green Belt Certification in Six Sigma and Quality Management from the Weatherhead School of Management. Offered as OPMT 420 and SCMG 420. Prereq: SCMG/MSOR 406 and SCMG/MSOR 433 and enrolled in Master of Supply Chain Management program.
SCMG 422	Lean Operations	3 Units	In this course, students will be taught how to identify inefficiencies associated with overproduction, waiting, transport, extra processing, inventory, motion and defects. One-by-one, areas of inefficiencies are to be identified and improved while educating the workforce towards continual improvement. Similarly, participants will be trained to reduce lead times in areas such as engineering design, order entry, purchasing, order fulfillment, receiving, production, packaging, shipping, invoicing and collection. The above improvements will lead to cost reductions. Students will be trained in costing techniques, target pricing, and cost maintenance. The course will be delivered along the following themes: 1) Mapping the Value Stream (current and future state) 2) Workplace Organization: 5S & Safety, 3) Defect Reduction and Error Proofing, 4) Quick Changeover,  5) Standard Operations, 6) Total Productive Maintenance, 7) Visual management, 8) One-piece flow, 9) Lean Metrics. This course is not oriented toward specialists in operations management. Its goal is to introduce you to the environments and help you appreciate the problems that operations managers are confronted with and the key issues in their management. Offered as OPMT 422 and SCMG 422. Prereq: For Master of Supply Chain Management students only.
SCMG 432A	Spreadsheet and Business Process Simulation - I	1.5 Unit	Computer simulation is a process of designing and creating a computer model (vedio game) that mimics an existing or proposed system so as to better understand the behavior of the system. Many studies have shown that in industry, simulation is most frequently used Operations Research tool due to its ability to deal with complex systems. Another reason for the recent popularity of simulation is the availability of specialized software with animation capabilities. This course is designed to give students basic ideas of simulation methodology with the aid of popular simulation software. The emphasis of the course is in simulating business processes, however, the versatility of the technique will be demonstrated with applications from finance, health care, etc. The main focus of the course is on building simulation models using state of the art software (@RISK and ARENA). The grading is based on weekly homework and final exam. Offered as OPRE 332A, OPRE 432A, and SCMG 432A. Prereq: SCMG 433.
SCMG 432B	Spreadsheet and Business Process Simulation - II	1.5 Unit	Computer simulation is a process of designing and creating a computer model (video game) that mimics an existing or proposed system so as to better understand the behavior of the system. Many studies have shown that in industry, simulation is most frequently used Operations Research tool due to its ability to deal with complex systems. Another reason for the recent popularity of simulation is the availability of specialized software with animation capabilities. This course is designed to give students basic ideas of simulation methodology with the aid of popular simulation software. The emphasis of the course is in simulating business processes, however, the versatility of the technique will be demonstrated with applications from finance, health care, etc. This course builds on 332A/432A (where the main emphasis was to build simulation model using @RISK and ARENA) and focuses on statistical ideas and tools needed in building, analyzing and experimenting with these models. Offered as OPRE 332B, OPRE 432B, and SCMG 432B Prereq: SCMG 433 and Prereq or Coreq: SCMG 432A.
SCMG 433	Statistical Data Analytics for Supply Chain	3 Units	Data of many kinds are typically available in practice, but the challenge is to use those data to make effective professional decisions.  This software-intensive course begins with useful descriptions of data and the probability theory foundation on which statistics rests.  It continues to statistics, including the central limit theorem, which explains why data often appear to be normally distributed, and the Palm-Khintchine theorem which explains why data often appear to have a Poisson distribution.  The remainder of the course focuses on regression and forecasting, including detecting and overcoming some of the deadly sins of regression, and the surprising flexibility of regression models.  Recommended preparation: One semester of undergraduate calculus or consent of instructor. Offered as OPRE 433 and SCMG 433. Prereq: For Master of Supply Chain Management students only.
SCMG 450	Project Management	3 Units	Project management is concerned with the management and control of a group of interrelated tasks required to be completed in an efficient and timely manner for the successful accomplishment of the objectives of the project. Since each project is usually unique in terms of task structure, risk characteristics and objectives, the management of projects is significantly different from the management of repetitive processes designed to produce a series of similar products or outputs. Large-scale projects are characterized by a significant commitment of organizational and economic resources coupled with a high degree of uncertainty. The objective of this course is to enhance the ability of participants to respond to the challenges of large-scale projects so that they can be more effective as project managers. We study in detail up-to-date concepts, models, and techniques useful for the evaluation, analysis, management, and control of projects. Offered as OPMT 350, OPMT 450 and SCMG 450. Prereq or Coreq: SCMG 433
SCMG 460	Supply Chain Strategy	1.5 Unit	Have you ever wondered what it takes to manage a successful supply chain? It all comes down to the right strategy. Supply Chain Management Strategy is the indispensable direction for managing a successful supply chain. This course reviews how organizational strategies can inform operations and supply chain strategies. Several cases in various industries are discussed to illustrate how businesses employ various supply chain business models to achieve higher efficiencies, better, quality, faster service, and subsequently promote business objectives. Offered as OPMT 460 and SCMG 460. Prereq: For Master of Supply Chain Management students only.
SCMG 470	Supply Chain Risk Management	1.5 Unit	A Supply Chain comprises firms, organizations, and individuals, linked through material, information, and financial flows, and whose activities enable products and services to be created and reach the consumers. Risk Management is the process of identifying risks, forecasting their impact, devising, mitigation strategies, and applying those strategies in anticipation or in response to adverse events. Supply Chain Risk Management (SCRM) is a set of solutions for identifying, measuring, preparing for, and mitigating adverse events in supply chains. As the widespread use of outsourcing is stretching supply chains further geographically and turning supply networks into intricate, global, and fragile webs, supply disruptions happen more frequently than ever and lead to substantial financial losses. A 2015 National Institute of Standards and Technology study concluded that "the likelihood that a manufacturing organization will not experience a supply chain disruption in a twenty-four month period is a mere 2%." According to research, firms that experienced supply glitches have suffered tremendous erosion in the shareholders' value (the abnormal return on stock of these companies was negative 40%). Disruptions are only one example of supply risks. From commodity price fluctuations to product adulteration, from cyber security to patent violations, from regulatory compliance to supplier bankruptcies, supply chains are rife with risks and opportunities if you know how to recognize and take advantage of them. In this course, you will learn the best industry practices and be exposed to the most current academic insights on SCRM. You will know the process for SCRM, a variety of well-known and emerging supply risks, and the unique challenges of managing each one. You will also learn advantages and disadvantages of different risk mitigation tools. You will take away a number of useful analysis tools that you can immediately apply at your job. You will know the terminology of the field, the definitions, and the "state of the art" techniques. By the end of the course, you will be able to evaluate companies' performance with respect to supply risk management, and you will be able to create, contribute to, and run a supply-risk management program at your company. Offered as OPMT 470 and SCMG 470. Prereq: SCMG 476A or OPMT 476A or MBAC 507 or Requisites Not Met permission.  Coreq: SCMG 406 or SCMG 476A or OPMT 476A or Requisites Not Met permission.
SCMG 475	Global Supply Chain Logistics	3 Units	The course will attempt to achieve two objectives: (1) to develop your skills in solving specific types of logistics/supply chain problems, and (2) to improve your capabilities in dealing with unstructured problems of the type encountered by intermediate and top managers. Skill development is accomplished through lecturers, case studies, homework, and examinations. These skills are valuable for addressing specific problems where the given technology is useful in treating them. On the other hand, broader analytical skills are enhanced using case studies and class discussion, which allow problem solving to be placed in a larger context. Defining a framework for analysis, applying concepts and principles, and commenting on the analysis of others help to achieve the second objective. Of course, these objectives interplay throughout the course of study. Offered as OPMT 475 and SCMG 475. Prereq: SCMG/MSOR 406 and SCMG/MSOR 433 and enrolled in Master of Supply Chain Management program.
SCMG 476A	Strategic Sourcing in Supply Chain	1.5 Unit	The primary purpose of the course is to provide a comprehensive introduction to supply issues in manufacturing and service organizations.  Procurement and supply management has evolved as a strategic function across various industries.  Recent volatility in commodity prices has further enhanced the challenges in procurement.  This course explores sourcing strategies in global supply chains to reduce cost and enhance the competitiveness of the firm.  This course will provide you with a framework for thinking about strategic sourcing and tools to procure commodities and services efficiently. Offered as OPMT 476A and SCMG 476A. Prereq: For Master of Supply Chain Management students only.
SCMG 477A	Business Forecasting	1.5 Unit	This course introduces nonmathematical managers to the major quantitative models designed for sound demand and system forecasting in today's complex and increasingly uncertain supply chains. Topics will also include reliability of historical data sets to forecast future patterns. The course will also cover non-quantitative tools to forecast demand for new products, services and technologies when historical data are not readily available. Emphasis is placed on a general understanding of theory, mechanics, application potential, available software packages, and templates. Offered as OPMT 377A, OPMT 477A and SCMG 477A. Prereq: SCMG 411A and SCMG 433 and enrolled in Master of Supply Chain Management program.
SCMG 477B	Enterprise Resource Planning in the Supply Chain	1.5 Unit	Enterprise resource planning is the dominant system by which companies translate the needs from their customers into the detailed plans that the company must perform to meet the customer needs, and the resulting support the company will need from its suppliers. As such, it is a central player in the process of supply chain management. In this course, we study both the quantitative and qualitative concepts and techniques to help manage a company's operations to perform these important translation and planning tasks in order to help the company be successful. A major emphasis during the course is the design of processes and procedures (algorithms) for solving very complex (wicked) problems as a part of both class discussions and while working on case studies, as well as critiquing the designs so as to clearly understand their limitations. Offered as OPMT 377B, OPMT 477B, and SCMG 477B Prereq: Enrolled in Master of Supply Chain Management program.  Prereq or Coreq: SCMG 477A.
SCMG 478	Operational Excellence	3 Units	This course focuses on the essence, principles, and practices of total quality management (TQM) and Operational Excellence.  Students learn management issues of identifying, analyzing, and implementing improvement projects in organizations. Topics are mostly non-quantitative with a focus on challenging aspects of quality management that students need to know beyond green belt certification such as learning to see processes better, defining quality ethically, analyzing side effects of change, and leading Kaizen, benchmarking, and brainstorming sessions. The course involves a rigorous real-world project of continuous improvement. Students will also have an opportunity to visit a local plant to get hands on experience with a real Kaizen event. Several guest talks are also scheduled to invite Black Belt professionals to discuss their experiences with quality management in Supply Chain. Offered as OPMT 478 and SCMG 478. Prereq: For Master of Supply Chain Management students only and (SCMG 420 or OPMT 420 or IIME 440).
SCMG 480	Blockchain Technology in Supply Chain Management	1.5 Unit	This course is intended to provide students with a grounding in blockchain basic concepts to enable them to understand potential applications within the supply chain. As the technology continues to develop and evolve, new use cases will emerge. Supply chain leaders need to know the capabilities offered by blockchain along with the potential risks and challenges associated with blockchain's use and implementation. Students will connect with real world organizations that are pushing ahead with the technology as a way to show its potential. Offered as OPMT 480 and SCMG 480. Prereq or Coreq: SCMG 406 or MBAC 408 or MBAC 507 or HSMC 412 or IIME 432 or Requisites Not Met permission.
SCMG 491	Revenue Management	3 Units	This course will focus on the theories and applications of data techniques to analyze demand models, and use optimization techniques to inform strategic decision making upon pricing and revenue management problems. The key ingredients of the class include the use of sophisticated data and optimization tools towards: - Mastering static and dynamic demand models - Understanding consumer choice behaviors - Understanding and formulating firm policies based on price response - Creating optimization toolkits for organizational decision making - Understanding and formulating competitive response The course is "tools agnostic" - you are welcome to use any of the available software packages (like MS Excel, Stata, SPSS) and programming languages (like R, Python or Matlab). Offered as OPMT 491 and SCMG 491. Prereq: SCMG 433 and SCMG 411A.
SCMG 492	Foundations of Python Programming	1.5 Unit	Python is an object-oriented programming language that can interact with the world wide web as well as Excel and other programming languages like VBA. As such, Python has gained popularity and is becoming an industry standard in many areas, including supply chain management. In addition to assignment, if/then, and for/while statements, in this course you will learn about object-oriented programming and how to implement those ideas with appropriate data structures. You will also learn how to use libraries that others have created, such as Numpy for numerical calculations (like working with vectors, matrices, and solving systems of linear equations). In addition to individual homeworks, you will solve an assigned project in groups and make a final presentation to the class with PowerPoint. Being able to communicate your model and results is part of learning to work effectively with others in an organization, which is a goal of the supply chain program. All of this is designed to enable you to build and solve models that help organizations make good decisions. Offered as BUAI 492 and SCMG 492. Prereq: For Master of Supply Chain Management students only.
SYBB 311	Technologies in Bioinformatics	3 Units	This course introduces students to the high-throughput technologies used to collect data for bioinformatics research in various fields including genomics, proteomics, clinical informatics, imaging, and metagenomics. This class surveys the conceptual models and tools used to analyze and interpret data collected by high-throughput technologies, and the latest applications of bioinformatics in the current state of science. This course will focus on genotyping, DNA/RNA sequencing, mass spectrometry-based proteomics, phosphoproteomics, electronic health records, metagenomics and immunology. The knowledge structures that we will cover include biomedical ontologies and databases, bioinformatics tools, essential algorithms in bioinformatics and networks. There will be in class exercises and assignments covering tools for genome/proteome exploration and analysis. This is an active learning course that will provide a hands-on learning experience for the students. Offered as SYBB 311 and SYBB 411. Prereq: BIOL 214 and BIOL 215 or Graduate standing.
SYBB 311A	Survey of Bioinformatics: Technologies in Bioinformatics	1 Unit	SYBB 311A/411A is a 5-week course that introduces students to the high-throughput technologies used to collect data for bioinformatics research in the fields of genomics, proteomics, and metabolomics. In particular, we will focus on mass spectrometer-based proteomics, DNA and RNA sequencing, genotyping, protein microarrays, and mass spectrometry-based metabolomics. This is a lecture-based course that relies heavily on out-of-class readings. Graduate students will be expected to write a report and give an oral presentation at the end of the course.  SYBB 311A/411A is part of the SYBB survey series which is composed of the following course sequence: (1) Technologies in Bioinformatics, (2) Data Integration in Bioinformatics, (3) Translational Bioinformatics, and (4) Programming for Bioinformatics. Each standalone section of this course series introduces students to an aspect of a bioinformatics project - from data collection (SYBB 311A/411A), to data integration (SYBB 311B/411B), to research applications (SYBB 311C/411C), with a fourth module (SYBB 311D/411D) introducing basic programming skills.  Graduate students have the option of enrolling in all four courses or choosing the individual modules most relevant to their background and goals with the exception of SYBB 411D, which must be taken with SYBB 411A. Offered as SYBB 311A, BIOL 311A and SYBB 411A. Prereq: BIOL 214 and BIOL 215. Coreq: SYBB 311B and SYBB 311C.
SYBB 311B	Survey of Bioinformatics: Data Integration in Bioinformatics	1 Unit	SYBB 311B/411B is a five week course that surveys the conceptual models and tools used to analyze and interpret data collected by high-throughput technologies, providing an entry points for students new to the field of bioinformatics. The knowledge structures that we will cover include: biomedical ontologies, signaling pathways, and interaction networks. We will also cover tools for genome exploration and analysis.   The SYBB survey series is composed of the following course sequence: (1) Technologies in Bioinformatics, (2) Data Integration in Bioinformatics, (3) Translational Bioinformatics, and (4) Programming for Bioinformatics. Each standalone section of this course series introduces students to an aspect of a bioinformatics project - from data collection (SYBB 311A/411A), to data integration (SYBB 311B/411B), to research applications (SYBB 311C/411C), with a fourth module (SYBB 311D/411D) introducing basic programming.   Graduate students have the option of enrolling in all four courses or choosing the individual modules most relevant to their background and goals with the exception of SYBB 411D, which must be taken with SYBB 411A. Offered as SYBB 311B, BIOL 311B, and SYBB 411B. Prereq: BIOL 214 and BIOL 215.  Coreq: SYBB 311A and SYBB 311C.
SYBB 311C	Survey of Bioinformatics: Translational Bioinformatics	1 Unit	SYBB 311C/411C is a longitudinal course that introduces students to the latest applications of bioinformatics, with a focus on translational research. Topics include: `omic drug discovery, pharmacogenomics, microbiome analysis, and genomic medicine. The focus of this course is on illustrating how bioinformatic technologies can be paired with data integration tools for various applications in medicine. The course is organized as a weekly journal club, with instructors leading the discussion of recent literature in the field of bioinformatics. Students will be expected to complete readings beforehand; students will also work in teams to write weekly reports reviewing journal articles in the field.  The SYBB survey series is composed of the following course sequence: (1) Technologies in Bioinformatics, (2) Data Integration in Bioinformatics, (3) Translational Bioinformatics, and (4) Programming for Bioinformatics. Each standalone section of this course series introduces students to an aspect of a bioinformatics project - from data collection (SYBB 311A/411A), to data integration (SYBB 311B/411B), to research applications (SYBB 311C/411C), with a fourth module (SYBB 311D/411D) introducing basic programming.   Graduate students have the option of enrolling in all four courses or choosing the individual modules most relevant to their background and goals with the exception of SYBB 411D, which must be taken with SYBB 411A. Offered as SYBB 311C, BIOL 311C and SYBB 411C. Prereq: BIOL 214 and BIOL 215. Coreq: SYBB 311A and SYBB 311B.
SYBB 312R	Basic Statistics for Engineering and Science Using R Programming	3 Units	For advanced undergraduate students in engineering, physical sciences, life sciences. Comprehensive introduction to probability models and statistical methods of analyzing data with the object of formulating statistical models and choosing appropriate methods for inference from experimental and observational data and for testing the model's validity. Balanced approach with equal emphasis on probability, fundamental concepts of statistics, point and interval estimation, hypothesis testing, analysis of variance, design of experiments, and regression modeling.  Note: Credit given for only one (1) of STAT 312, STAT 312R, STAT 313 or SYBB 312R.   Offered as STAT 312R and SYBB 312R. Prereq: MATH 122 or equivalent.
SYBB 319	Applied Probability and Stochastic Processes for Biology	3 Units	Applications of probability and stochastic processes to biological systems. Mathematical topics will include: introduction to discrete and continuous probability spaces (including numerical generation of pseudo random samples from specified probability distributions), Markov processes in discrete and continuous time with discrete and continuous sample spaces, point processes including homogeneous and inhomogeneous Poisson processes and Markov chains on graphs, and diffusion processes including Brownian motion and the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process.  Biological topics will be determined by the interests of the students and the instructor.  Likely topics include: stochastic ion channels, molecular motors and stochastic ratchets, actin and tubulin polymerization, random walk models for neural spike trains, bacterial chemotaxis, signaling and genetic regulatory networks, and stochastic predator-prey dynamics.  The emphasis will be on practical simulation and analysis of stochastic phenomena in biological systems.  Numerical methods will be developed using a combination of MATLAB, the R statistical package, MCell, and/or URDME, at the discretion of the instructor.  Student projects will comprise a major part of the course. Offered as BIOL 319, ECSE 319, MATH 319, SYBB 319, BIOL 419, EBME 419, MATH 419, PHOL 419, and SYBB 419. Prereq: MATH 224 or MATH 223 and BIOL 300 or BIOL 306 and MATH 201 or MATH 307 or consent of instructor.
SYBB 387	Undergraduate Research in Systems Biology	1 - 3 Units	This course provides students research experience in data science, proteomics, bioinformatics, and clinical informatics under the guidance of faculty affiliated with the Systems Biology and Bioinformatics program. Areas of research include production of  big data at bench (cellular proteomics, structural proteomics, genomics, and  interaction proteomics) and  analysis of  big data such as computational/statistical biology, bioinformatics tool development and clinical research informatics. A written report must be approved by the sponsor and submitted to the director of the Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics before credit is granted.
SYBB 402	Introduction to Scientific Computing	1 Unit	This course will introduce students to basic data analysis, scripting and computational skills. SYBB 402 is designed for those with little or no prior programming experience. However, advanced programmers can still learn the tools and resources available to conduct scientific research. Students will gain hands-on experience working with data science software, Linux operating system, R/python packages, and functions designed for bioinformatics applications. At the end of the class, the students will complete a small-scale project/final, where they analyze a publicly available dataset and produce a short report. This course will prepare students for the SYBB Survey Series, which is composed of the following course sequence: (A) Technologies in Bioinformatics, (B) Data Integration in Bioinformatics, (C) Translational Bioinformatics, and (D) Programming for Bioinformatics. Each standalone section of this course series introduces students to an aspect of a bioinformatics project - from data collection (SYBB 311/411A) to data integration (SYBB 311/411B), to research applications (SYBB 311/411C), with a fourth module (SYBB 412) introducing basic bioinformatics programming skills.
SYBB 411	Technologies in Bioinformatics	3 Units	This course introduces students to the high-throughput technologies used to collect data for bioinformatics research in various fields including genomics, proteomics, clinical informatics, imaging, and metagenomics. This class surveys the conceptual models and tools used to analyze and interpret data collected by high-throughput technologies, and the latest applications of bioinformatics in the current state of science. This course will focus on genotyping, DNA/RNA sequencing, mass spectrometry-based proteomics, phosphoproteomics, electronic health records, metagenomics and immunology. The knowledge structures that we will cover include biomedical ontologies and databases, bioinformatics tools, essential algorithms in bioinformatics and networks. There will be in class exercises and assignments covering tools for genome/proteome exploration and analysis. This is an active learning course that will provide a hands-on learning experience for the students. Offered as SYBB 311 and SYBB 411. Prereq: Graduate Standing or BIOL 214 and BIOL 215.
SYBB 411A	Survey of Bioinformatics: Technologies in Bioinformatics	1 Unit	SYBB 311A/411A is a 5-week course that introduces students to the high-throughput technologies used to collect data for bioinformatics research in the fields of genomics, proteomics, and metabolomics. In particular, we will focus on mass spectrometer-based proteomics, DNA and RNA sequencing, genotyping, protein microarrays, and mass spectrometry-based metabolomics. This is a lecture-based course that relies heavily on out-of-class readings. Graduate students will be expected to write a report and give an oral presentation at the end of the course.  SYBB 311A/411A is part of the SYBB survey series which is composed of the following course sequence: (1) Technologies in Bioinformatics, (2) Data Integration in Bioinformatics, (3) Translational Bioinformatics, and (4) Programming for Bioinformatics. Each standalone section of this course series introduces students to an aspect of a bioinformatics project - from data collection (SYBB 311A/411A), to data integration (SYBB 311B/411B), to research applications (SYBB 311C/411C), with a fourth module (SYBB 311D/411D) introducing basic programming skills.  Graduate students have the option of enrolling in all four courses or choosing the individual modules most relevant to their background and goals with the exception of SYBB 411D, which must be taken with SYBB 411A. Offered as SYBB 311A, BIOL 311A and SYBB 411A. Prereq: Graduate Standing or Requisites Not Met Permission.
SYBB 411B	Survey of Bioinformatics: Data Integration in Bioinformatics	1 Unit	SYBB 311B/411B is a five week course that surveys the conceptual models and tools used to analyze and interpret data collected by high-throughput technologies, providing an entry points for students new to the field of bioinformatics. The knowledge structures that we will cover include: biomedical ontologies, signaling pathways, and interaction networks. We will also cover tools for genome exploration and analysis.   The SYBB survey series is composed of the following course sequence: (1) Technologies in Bioinformatics, (2) Data Integration in Bioinformatics, (3) Translational Bioinformatics, and (4) Programming for Bioinformatics. Each standalone section of this course series introduces students to an aspect of a bioinformatics project - from data collection (SYBB 311A/411A), to data integration (SYBB 311B/411B), to research applications (SYBB 311C/411C), with a fourth module (SYBB 311D/411D) introducing basic programming.   Graduate students have the option of enrolling in all four courses or choosing the individual modules most relevant to their background and goals with the exception of SYBB 411D, which must be taken with SYBB 411A. Offered as SYBB 311B, BIOL 311B, and SYBB 411B. Prereq: Graduate Standing or Requisites Not Met Permission.
SYBB 411C	Survey of Bioinformatics: Translational Bioinformatics	1 Unit	SYBB 311C/411C is a longitudinal course that introduces students to the latest applications of bioinformatics, with a focus on translational research. Topics include: `omic drug discovery, pharmacogenomics, microbiome analysis, and genomic medicine. The focus of this course is on illustrating how bioinformatic technologies can be paired with data integration tools for various applications in medicine. The course is organized as a weekly journal club, with instructors leading the discussion of recent literature in the field of bioinformatics. Students will be expected to complete readings beforehand; students will also work in teams to write weekly reports reviewing journal articles in the field.  The SYBB survey series is composed of the following course sequence: (1) Technologies in Bioinformatics, (2) Data Integration in Bioinformatics, (3) Translational Bioinformatics, and (4) Programming for Bioinformatics. Each standalone section of this course series introduces students to an aspect of a bioinformatics project - from data collection (SYBB 311A/411A), to data integration (SYBB 311B/411B), to research applications (SYBB 311C/411C), with a fourth module (SYBB 311D/411D) introducing basic programming.   Graduate students have the option of enrolling in all four courses or choosing the individual modules most relevant to their background and goals with the exception of SYBB 411D, which must be taken with SYBB 411A. Offered as SYBB 311C, BIOL 311C and SYBB 411C. Prereq: Graduate Standing or Requisites Not Met Permission.
SYBB 412	Survey of Bioinformatics: Programming for Bioinformatics	3 Units	SYBB 412 is a 3 credit-course that will introduce students to bioinformatics analysis and basic programming.  This course is designed for those with little or no prior programming experience. However, advanced programmers can still learn bioinformatics pipelines and software packages to conduct research. Students will gain hands-on experience working with bioinformatics software, R packages and functions designed for bioinformatics applications. Programming for Bioinformatics course mainly focuses on R (rproject.org), and introduces students to basic programming in R, what packages are available, and teaches an introductory hands-on experience working with R by walking through the students in analyzing large -omics datasets. At the end of the class, the students are assessed with a small-scale project, where they analyze a publicly available dataset and produce a short report. This is an active learning class where adaptive learning and active learning teaching practices are used. Adaptive learning provide personalized learning, where efficient, effective, and customized learning paths to engage each student is offered. Recommended Preparation: BIOL 326 (Genetics) or equivalent Prereq: (SYBB 411A and Graduate Standing) or Requisites Not Met Permission.
SYBB 419	Applied Probability and Stochastic Processes for Biology	3 Units	Applications of probability and stochastic processes to biological systems. Mathematical topics will include: introduction to discrete and continuous probability spaces (including numerical generation of pseudo random samples from specified probability distributions), Markov processes in discrete and continuous time with discrete and continuous sample spaces, point processes including homogeneous and inhomogeneous Poisson processes and Markov chains on graphs, and diffusion processes including Brownian motion and the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process.  Biological topics will be determined by the interests of the students and the instructor.  Likely topics include: stochastic ion channels, molecular motors and stochastic ratchets, actin and tubulin polymerization, random walk models for neural spike trains, bacterial chemotaxis, signaling and genetic regulatory networks, and stochastic predator-prey dynamics.  The emphasis will be on practical simulation and analysis of stochastic phenomena in biological systems.  Numerical methods will be developed using a combination of MATLAB, the R statistical package, MCell, and/or URDME, at the discretion of the instructor.  Student projects will comprise a major part of the course. Offered as BIOL 319, ECSE 319, MATH 319, SYBB 319, BIOL 419, EBME 419, MATH 419, PHOL 419, and SYBB 419.
SYBB 421	Fundamentals of Clinical Information Systems	3 Units	Technology has played a significant role in the evolution of medical science and treatment.  While we often think about progress in terms of the practical application of, say, imaging to the diagnosis and monitoring of disease, technology is increasingly expected to improve the organization and delivery of healthcare services, too.  Information technology plays a key role in the transformation of administrative support systems (finance and administration), clinical information systems (information to support patient care), and decision support systems (managerial decision-making).  This introductory graduate course provides the student with the opportunity to gain insight and situational experience with clinical information systems (CIS).  Often considered synonymous with electronic medical records, the "art" of CIS more fundamentally examines the effective use of data and information technology to assist in the migration away from paper-based systems and improve organizational performance.  In this course we examine clinical information systems in the context of (A) operational and strategic information needs, (B) information technology and analytic tools for workflow design, and (C) subsequent implementation of clinical information systems in patient care.  Legal and ethical issues are explored.  The student learns the process of "plan, design, implement" through hands-on applications to select CIS problems, while at the same time gaining insights and understanding of the impacts placed on patients and health care providers. Offered as EBME 473, IIME 473 and SYBB 421.
SYBB 459	Bioinformatics for Systems Biology	3 Units	Description of omic data (biological sequences, gene expression, protein-protein interactions, protein-DNA interactions, protein expression, metabolomics, biological ontologies), regulatory network inference, topology of regulatory networks, computational inference of protein-protein interactions, protein interaction databases, topology of protein interaction networks, module and protein complex discovery, network alignment and mining, computational models for network evolution, network-based functional inference, metabolic pathway databases, topology of metabolic pathways, flux models for analysis of metabolic networks, network integration, inference of domain-domain interactions, signaling pathway inference from protein interaction networks, network models and algorithms for disease gene identification, identification of dysregulated subnetworks network-based disease classification. Offered as CSDS 459 and SYBB 459.
SYBB 472	BioDesign	3 Units	Medical device innovations that would have been considered science fiction a decade ago are already producing new standards of patient care.  Innovation leading to lower cost of care, minimally invasive procedures and shorter recovery times is equally important to healthcare business leaders, educators, clinicians, and policy-makers.  Innovation is a driver of regional economic development and wealth creation in organizational units ranging in size from the start-up to the Fortune 500 companies.  In a broader context, the pace of translational research leading to product and service innovation is highly interdisciplinary, thus, new products and services result from team efforts, marked by a systematic, structured approach to bringing new medical technologies to market and impacting patient care.  In this course we examine medical technology innovations in the context of (A) addressing unmet clinical needs, (B) the process of inventing new medical devices and instruments, and (C) subsequent implementation of these advances in patient care.  In short, the student learns the process of "identify, invent, implement" in the field of BioDesign. Offered as EBME 472, IIME 472 and SYBB 472.
SYBB 501	Biomedical Informatics and Systems Biology Journal Club	0 Unit	The purpose of this journal club is to provide an opportunity for students to critically discuss a wide variety of informatics and systems biology topics and to present their works in progress.  A wide range of informatics and systems theory approaches to conducting biomedical research will be accomplished through the guided selection of articles to be discussed during the club.  Potential articles will be chosen from scientific journals including: Nature, Science, BMC Bioinformatics, BMC Systems Biology, the Journal of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, and the Journal for Biomedical Informatics.  During journal presentations, trainees will be expected to lead a discussion of the article that leads to the critical evaluation of the merit of the article and its implication for biomedical informatics and systems biology.  The Journal Club will also provide a forum for trainees to present proposed, on-going, and completed research.  Trainees will attend and participate in the Journal Club throughout their tenure in the program.  The Journal Club will meet twice a month and each trainee will be required to present one journal article and one research in progress presentation yearly.  The Journal Club will also include sessions where issues related to the responsible conduct of research are reviewed and extended.
SYBB 528	Contemporary Approaches to Drug Discovery	3 Units	This course is designed to teach the students how lead compounds are discovered, optimized, and processed through clinical trials for FDA approval.  Topics will include: medicinal chemistry, parallel synthesis, drug delivery and devices, drug administration and pharmacokinetics, and clinical trials.  A special emphasis will be placed on describing how structural biology is used for in silico screening and lead optimization.  This component will include hands-on experience in using sophisticated drug discovery software to conduct in silico screening and the development of drug libraries.  Each student will conduct a course project involving in silico screening and lead optimization against known drug targets, followed by the drafting of an inventory disclosure.  Another important aspect of this course will be inclusion of guest lectures by industrial leaders who describe examples of success stories of drug development. Offered as BIOC 528, PHOL 528, PHRM 528, and SYBB 528.
SYBB 535	Independent Study in Biomedical Informatics	1 - 3 Units	For students pursuing MS or PhD degrees in SYBB, this course provides the opportunity for in-depth exposure to a subfield of systems biology and/or biomedical informatics. Degree-seeking students can enroll in this course prior to beginning 601 or 701 research. In conjunction with their proposed research advisor, enrolled students will undertake a self-directed study of a subfield of systems biology and/or biomedical informatics pertinent to their research area. The selected readings may also represent topics not covered by the student's coursework. The student's performance will be evaluated in an end-of-semester presentation or report at their advisor's discretion.
SYBB 555	Current Proteomics and Bioinformatics	3 Units	This course is designed for graduate students across the university who wish to acquire a better understanding of fundamental concepts of proteomics and related bioinformatics as well as hands-on experience with techniques used in current proteomics.  Lectures will cover protein/peptide separation techniques, protein mass spectrometry, and biological applications which include quantitative proteomics, protein modification proteomics, interaction proteomics, structural genomics and structural proteomics. Also, it will cover experimental design, basic statistical concept and issues related to high-dimensional data from high-throughput technologies.  Laboratory portion will involve practice on the separation of proteins by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, molecular weight measurement of proteins by mass spectrometry, peptide structural characterization by tandem mass spectrometry. It will also include bioinformatics tools for protein identification and protein-protein interaction networks.  The instructors' research topics will also be discussed. Recommended preparation: CBIO 453, CBIO 455, and PQHS 431. Offered as PHRM 555 and SYBB 555.
SYBB 601	Systems Biology and Bioinformatics Research	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
SYBB 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
SYBB 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
THTR 100	Introduction to Acting	3 Units	A course designed to provide the student with a basic understanding of acting and performance. Fundamentals in improvisation, technique, and scene study are stressed. At the end of the course, the student will demonstrate their knowledge of acting technique by presenting a monologue from a play. This course is required for, but not limited to, students who intend to major or minor in theater.
THTR 103	Acting: Scene Study	3 Units	This course continues the work begun in THTR 100 with emphasis on action, emotional life, and text analysis as the essential elements of the actor's work. Prereq: THTR 100.
THTR 105	Introduction to Stagecraft	3 Units	An introduction to theater terminology and technology with an emphasis on scenic construction, lighting, stage rigging, painting, and production. A practicum in wood shop and stage construction.
THTR 110	Introduction to Theater	3 Units	This course is a fundamental study of theatre from the standpoint of developing the critical acumen of a potential audience. Through readings, recordings, and attending live theater, the course introduces the student to each ingredient of the theatrical experience: audience, playwriting, acting, directing, theatre architecture, design and technology.  The student will demonstrate their understanding of the function and interdependence of various theater disciplines through a series of written assignments and group projects.
THTR 111	Introduction to Design	3 Units	This course offers the opportunity to learn, develop, and practice the art of set, costume, and lighting design by concentrates specifically on the processes, skills, and disciplines of design for performance. Furthermore, students will read several plays and examine ways in which theater design can suggest meaning and interpretation of the script. Students will learn basic design elements and principles of composition through interactive, collaborative projects and exercises in addition to critically analyzing other designers' works from a broad spectrum of design styles. Emphasis will be placed on creativity, discovery, analysis, and collaboration.
THTR 185	Theater Practicum	1 - 2 Units	This Practicum is designed to provide students with hands-on experience in a variety of positions, both on stage and behind the scenes. Students will register for one credit-hour per semester unless directed otherwise by the Director of Undergraduate Theater Studies. Each student will meet with the Director of Undergraduate Theater Studies to determine his/her position for the semester. Credit will be awarded on a P/NP basis.
THTR 201	Movement	3 Units	The course focuses on developing a kinesthetic awareness of the body and its use as a theatrically expressive instrument. Students will explore physical approaches to acting, as well as select genres of physical theatre performance. Prereq: THTR 100.
THTR 204	Introduction to Stage Combat	3 Units	An introduction to both unarmed and armed stage combat. Students will learn basic techniques and experience the process involved in learning, rehearsing, and performing fight scenes for the theater and film.
THTR 206	Mr. Kiss Kiss Bang Bang - James Bond and Popular Culture	3 Units	The twenty-one films of James Bond have become part of popular culture, and the figure of the superspy has become mythic in proportion.  This series, from its first installment in 1963 to the latest reinvention of James Bond in 2006, not only depicts one dashing man's efforts to save the world from disaster again and again, but also traces the development of our popular culture.  Issues of violence, sex, the presentation and treatment of women, racial stereotypes, and spectacle among other topics can be discussed after viewing each film, providing an opportunity to explore the changing expectations of American audiences and the developing form of contemporary cinema.  Students who have taken USSO 286D may not receive credit for this class.
THTR 207	Our Heroes, Ourselves: Superheroes and Popular Culture	3 Units	Since the beginning of cinema, audiences have flocked to see larger-than-life superheroes conquer the unconquerable while also teaching us about ourselves and confirming (or challenging) our world view. Beginning with cinematic serials in the 1920s  and continuing to the recent Marvel production machine, these films not only depict a hero's efforts to save the world from disaster again and again, but also trace the development of our popular culture. Issues of violence, nationalism, the presentation and treatment of women, racial stereotypes, and spectacle among other topics can be discussed after viewing each film, providing an opportunity to explore the changing expectations of American audiences and the developing form of contemporary cinema.
THTR 223	Scenic Design	3 Units	This course introduces scenic design techniques, approaches, and tools. Emphasis will be on developing ideas through script analysis, visual research, and analysis of the physical theater space, and finally, the communication of ideas through drafting and model building. Prereq: THTR 111 or requisites not met permission.
THTR 224	Lighting Design	3 Units	This course is introduces lighting design techniques and approaches by combining theory with practical application.  The basics of lighting instruments and control consoles are used for practical projects examining light on the stage.  The design process is explored through script analysis, visual research, and choice of instrumentation, and communicated with the drafted light plot. Prereq: THTR 111 or requisites not met permission.
THTR 225	Costume Design	3 Units	This course is designed to introduce costume design techniques, approaches, and tools.  Students will learn the process of costume design through application of skill and theories - from script analysis through post-production.  In addition, students will participate in a survey of costume history and drawing/rendering skills will be taught.  This course will culminate in a project designed to incorporate skills and techniques acquired during the semester. Prereq: THTR 111 or instructor permission.
THTR 226	Stage Makeup	3 Units	An introductory hands-on course in theatrical makeup techniques and tools.  Students will study the history of stage makeup, its application, and the relationship between stage makeup and developing a character.  The course will explore a variety of makeup applications from basic corrective makeup to special effects including prosthetics, crepe hair, and blood effects.
THTR 227	Stage Management	3 Units	Designed to acquaint student with the numerous aspects of stage management.
THTR 231	Acting: Advanced Scene Study	3 Units	This course is an advanced exploration of contemporary acting technique emphasizing complex character relationships and heightened partner awareness to achieve greater specificity, spontaneity and emotional resonance in performance. Scene work will focus on contemporary playwrights. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: THTR 103.
THTR 232	Acting: Classical Technique	3 Units	An exploration of techniques to approach classical theater, with emphasis on the works of Shakespeare.  Presents the challenges of working with heightened language in classical texts, and provides skills necessary to transfer modern acting methods to these more poetic plays. Prereq: THTR 103.
THTR 233	Acting: Improvisation Technique	3 Units	This course is designed to teach the student the introductory techniques utilized by all improvisational actors.  While improvisation is best known as a comedic enterprise, this course will focus on using improvisational techniques/rules to improve communication skills, as well as a means to discover the "truth" of a moment.  In the professional world, improv is taught as a communication tool to doctors, lawyers, law enforcement officers, corporate big wigs, and little wigs.  In the medical field, the tools of improv are taught to patients suffering with PTSD, and children suffering from anxiety or social disorders to help them learn valuable communication skills.  In additional to improving listening and communication skills, the student of this course will learn to apply improv skills to the performance of short improv games/skits, as well as long-form improv, known as The Harold.
THTR 240	Video Production	3 Units	Video Production presents a hands-on introduction to video creation. Students are introduced to visual storytelling through concepts of single-camera production.  The course will explore all areas of pre-production, followed by production with the use of a camcorder and accompanying aids, and finished in post-production through the use of nonlinear editing software. Students will learn the necessary skills to create short videos from paper to finished product.
THTR 306	Acting: Camera Technique	3 Units	This course is an exploration of film and television acting with an emphasis on how it departs from stage work in terms of both preparation and execution. Students will have the opportunity to employ class techniques in a hands-on manner through exercises, performances of filmed scene work, and simulated on-camera auditions. Prereq: THTR 103.
THTR 307	Acting: Advanced Camera Techniques	3 Units	This course will build upon the fundamental skills learned in Camera Technique and focus on preparation for those seeking potential professional opportunities as performers in the film and television industry. In this course, students will come to understand the unique attributes explicit to varying genres of film & television, and develop an informed approach specific to both auditioning for and performing in each. Prereq: THTR 306.
THTR 312	Playwriting	3 Units	Theory and practice of dramatic writing, in the context of examples, classic and contemporary.  Recommended preparation: ENGL 203 or ENGL 213 or ENGL 214 or ENGL 303 or ENGL 304.   Offered as ENGL 305, THTR 312 and THTR 412.
THTR 314	Advanced Playwriting	3 Units	Theory and practice of dramatic writing with special focus on the craft of writing a full-length play. Offered as ENGL 314, THTR 314 and THTR 414. Prereq: ENGL 305 or THTR 312.
THTR 316	Screenwriting	3 Units	A critical exploration of the craft of writing for film, in which reading and practicum assignments will culminate in the student submitting an original full-length screenplay. Offered as ENGL 316, THTR 316 and THTR 416. Prereq: THTR 312 or ENGL 305 or THTR 412.
THTR 319	Greek Tragedy: Plays and Performance in Ancient Athens	3 Units	This course provides students the opportunity to read a significant number of ancient Greek tragedies in modern English translations. We read, study, and discuss selected works by Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides, as well as selected criticism, ancient and modern, of these plays. All semester we read the plays as literature composed for performance. We study literary elements within the plays and theatrical possibilities inherent in the texts. As we read the plays, we pay close attention to the historical context and look for what each play can tell us about myth, religion, ethics, and society in ancient Athens. Finally, we give attention to the way these tragic dramas and the theater in which they were performed have continued to inspire literature and theater for thousands of years. Lectures provide historical background on the playwrights, the plays, the mythic and historical background, and possible interpretation of the texts as literature and as performance pieces. Students discuss the plays that they read in class. The course has three examinations and a final project that includes writing an essay and staging a monologue or scene from one of the tragedies. Offered as CLSC 319, CLSC 419, THTR 319, THTR 419, WLIT 319, and WLIT 419. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
THTR 322	Theater in Ancient Rome	3 Units	This course is designed as a continuation of and companion to CLSC/THTR/WLIT 319/419 Greek Tragedy: Plays and Performance in Ancient Athens, although it may be taken without having taken, or before having taken, that course. Students in Theater in Ancient Rome will read a significant number of ancient Roman plays in modern English translation and study non-literary theatrical entertainment of the Roman Republic and Empire, that may include mime and pantomime, gladiatorial shows, political speeches, courtroom drama, and various other spectacles. The dramatic texts that we shall study include the fragments of early Latin drama, selected comedies by Plautus and Terence, and the tragedies of Seneca. We shall also consider Greek and Roman literature that comments on Roman theatrical practices. These works will be read for their literary merits and theatrical possibilities, while at the same time examining them for what they can tell us about Roman civilization. Similarly, when studying the non-literary theatrical works we shall examine historical and theatrical context including archaeological evidence from theaters and amphitheaters and material remains (masks, depictions of actors and gladiators on vases, terra cotta lamps, mosaics, etc.). Finally, while the majority of the course focuses on drama originally written in Latin and theatrical entertainments performed in ancient Rome, the course may include a brief survey of selected post-classical works indebted to the tradition of Roman drama and theater. Authors that may be studied include Hrotsvitha, Marlowe, Shakespeare, Racine, Molière, and the legacy of Roman drama and theater in contemporary stage and cinema such as Sondheim's A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum. Thus a secondary concern will be to consider how and in what ways the legacy of Roman drama and theater has continued to shape the dramatic arts since antiquity.  Offered as CLSC 322, CLSC 422, THTR 322, THTR 422, WLIT 322, and WLIT 422. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
THTR 323	Topics in Design	3 Units	This course will examine various topics relating to theatre design and technology not covered in other design courses.  Students will be provided with practical and theoretical knowledge on a specific topic in order to increase their design and/or technical skills.  In addition, each course offering will have its own stated objectives.  This course may be repeated by students with each new topic.. Prereq: THTR 111 or instructor permission.
THTR 325	Development of Theater: Beginnings to English Renaissance	3 Units	This course explores the foundations of theater in Western civilization, beginning with Greece and then charting and analyzing the developments in playwriting, design, acting and theater architecture.  Students read a wide variety of plays in order to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the history of the art form, but also learn how theater has played an integral societal function as a medium of political, economic, and cultural commentary.  Development of Theater I explores developments from Aeschylus to the English Renaissance.  Offered for undergraduates as THTR 325 and WLIT 360.  Students who have taken THTR 228/WLIT 228 are not allowed to enroll in this course.  Offered as THTR 325, WLIT 360, and THTR 425. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: At least Sophomore standing.
THTR 326	Development of Theater: Renaissance to Romanticism	3 Units	This course explores the many developments in playwriting, design, acting, and theater architecture across the world.  Students read a wide variety of plays in order to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the history of the art form, but also learn how theater has played an integral societal function as a medium of political, economic, and cultural commentary.  Development of Theater II not only explores the development of theatrical conventions in Spain, England, Italy, France and other European countries that lead to the creation of modern drama, but the course also offers an in-depth look at the history and conventions of theater in India, Korea, China, and Japan.   Offered as THTR 326, WLIT 361, and THTR 426. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: At least Sophomore standing.
THTR 327	American Drama	3 Units	Designed to provide students an overview of the development of theater in the United States and to familiarize them with the work and themes of selected American playwrights.   Offered as THTR 327 and THTR 427.
THTR 329	Modern and Contemporary Drama	3 Units	This course explores the development of western drama and theatre from 1860 through present-day productions.  The course emphasizes the relationship between different theatrical representations and their historical and social context.  Shakespeare's well-known dictum that "theatre holds a mirror up to nature" is expanded when one examines who is holding that mirror, and how their actions participate in the constantly shifting construction of culture.  Given this premise, the course investigates the development of specific European cultures (England, France, Germany, and Italy) as well as other regions (the United States, South America, and Russia) through the - live and literary - representations they make of themselves.   Offered as THTR 329, WLIT 329 and THTR 429. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: At least Sophomore standing.
THTR 330	Play Directing I	3 Units	This course will begin a two-semester study of the art and craft of stage direction of plays.  Topics covered will include history of the profession, directorial theory and practice, development of skills such as text analysis, design and concept, and general problem solving.   Offered as THTR 330 and THTR 430. Prereq: THTR 101 or THTR 102, and at least Junior standing.
THTR 331	Play Directing II	3 Units	This course continues with the basic concepts learned in THTR 330 and expands them in regard to the mechanics of production. Topics covered include ground planning and staging, working with actors, the casting process and communicating effectively with a design team. The course will culminate in a faculty-supervised directing project for public performance.  Offered as THTR 331 and THTR 431. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: THTR 330, and at least Junior standing.
THTR 334	Shakespeare: Histories and Tragedies	3 Units	Close reading of a selection of Shakespeare's tragedies and history plays (e.g., "Richard the Third," "Julius Caesar," "Hamlet," "King Lear").  Topics of discussion may include Renaissance drama as a social institution, the nature of tragedy, national history, gender roles, sexual politics, the state and its opponents, theatrical conventions.  Assessment may include opportunities for performance. A student may not receive credit for both ENGL 324 and ENGL 324C. Offered as ENGL 324, ENGL 324C, ENGL 424, and THTR 334. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
THTR 335	Shakespeare: Comedies and Romances	3 Units	Close reading of selected plays of Shakespeare in the genres of comedy and romance (e.g., "The Merchant of Venice," "Twelfth Night," "Measure for Measure," "The Tempest").  Topics of discussion may include issues of sexual desire, gender roles, marriage, the family, genre conventions.  Assessment may include opportunities for performance. A student may not receive credit for both ENGL 325 and ENGL 325C. Offered as ENGL 325, ENGL 325C, ENGL 425, and THTR 335. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
THTR 336	Concepts of Race within African American Plays	3 Units	This course provides an interdisciplinary study of race and African Americans within the context of African American plays. It will use the basic principles of African and African American history, urban studies, theater, sociology, economics and family life, etc. to identify aspects of race and racism. The course will provide an overview of race and racism in America through the lens of African American plays.  The semester long course will analyze and discuss a conceptual understanding of how aspects of race serve as central themes within African American plays. The course will engage in various theories, discussions and debates about the African American experience and the relationship to race and racism displayed within the context of plays. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Sophomore standing.
THTR 375	Voice	3 Units	Development of the actor's vocal instrument. Work in breath, resonance, articulation, range, and flexibility. Prereq: Theater major or consent of department.
THTR 385	Rehearsal and Production	1 - 3 Units	Practicum for students participating in production work in the Department of Theater and Dance. Supervised laboratory experience in technical theater, construction techniques, scenery, costumes, lighting, and props; production; ticket office operations, promotion, publicity and public relations; house management; wardrobe responsibilities; stage management; assistant directing; and other production positions relating to the mainstage performances in Eldred Theater. Students are recommended to take one credit hour per production, with a maximum of 8 credit hours allowed during their undergraduate career.
THTR 390	Advanced Topics in Design/Technology	3 Units	This is an advanced-level course designed to provide an opportunity for Design/Technical Theater Undergraduates to do an advanced project in scenic, costume, or lighting design, or in a technical area such as stage management or technical direction, as would be expected in the professional theater.  This project may be a realized departmental production or an unrealized project.  Working on a departmental production requires attendance at production meetings, technical rehearsals and other scheduled meetings. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: THTR 111 and (THTR 223, THTR 224, THTR 225, or THTR 227) or requisites not met permission.
THTR 393	Senior Capstone: Dramaturgy	3 Units	This course introduces students to theories of textual analysis and contextual research within the framework of theatrical performance. Students will investigate the history and methodologies of dramaturgy, and then apply the best practices of the profession to the study and production of contemporary plays. Because dramaturgy is a collaborative endeavor, students will participate with others in the production of a theoretical adaptation from a non-dramatic source, as well as the creation of an interdisciplinary theatre event and a multi-media performance project. By course end, students will be able to support their theatrical interests with dramaturgical insights and to work collaboratively to create productions that reflect the cultural and aesthetic diversity of the 21st century. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: Senior standing.
THTR 397	Honors Studies I	3 Units	Individual projects in acting, dance, and directing.
THTR 398	Honors Studies II	3 Units	Individual projects in acting, design, playwriting, and directing.
THTR 399	Independent Study in Theater Arts	1 - 3 Units	Independent research and project work in areas of acting, design, voice, theater history, playwriting, directing, or theater management.
THTR 401	Graduate Movement I: Foundations	3 Units	This class is meant to both cleanse and develop the palette; it represents a series of exercises intended to remove habits and blockages, freeing your use of your instrument and expanding your conscious range of expression. The majority of what we will do is not immediately applicable technique in terms of playable actions during performance, but is meant to build your foundation as a performer, laying a groundwork for more powerful future performances. Prereq: Must be a student in M.F.A. Acting program.
THTR 402	Graduate Movement II: Creations	3 Units	This second class in our movement sequence is all about creation, from character creation to devised physical theatre. It is about play, in the theatrical sense Lecoq refers to as Jeu. We will play with character masks, from larval/basal masks to full face character masks, explore mime, slapstick/pratfalls, clown, and nonverbal scenes with music. The basic structure will be similar in many ways to that of the previous semester, with a mix of autocours and more fully fleshed out devised scenes at the end of each week or unit. Prereq: THTR 401.
THTR 403	Graduate Movement III: Stage Combat	3 Units	Students will learn the mechanics and technique of unarmed and armed stage combat, following the curriculum set forth by the Society of American Fight Designers (SAFD). We will experience the techniques and process involved in learning, rehearsing, and performing fight scenes for the stage, culminating in the opportunity to test for SAFD Certification in Unarmed and at least one sword style. Prereq: THTR 402.
THTR 404	Graduate Movement IV: Genres and Styles	3 Units	The push beyond realism and into theatrical styles becomes a proving ground for more advanced application of the fundamental acting concepts garnered in your prior course work, as well as a playground for physical transformation and movement skill. Presentational theatre will be our primary focus, whether in the form of Elizabethan, Restoration, Commedia, Farce, or other genres, including the many "Isms." Your ability to synthesize prior training while applying specific templates of period movement or other genre styles is your capstone to our movement sequence. The basic structure will be similar in many ways to that of the previous semesters, with a mix of autocours and more fully fleshed out scenes at the end of each week or unit. Prereq: THTR 403.
THTR 412	Playwriting	3 Units	Theory and practice of dramatic writing, in the context of examples, classic and contemporary.  Recommended preparation: ENGL 203 or ENGL 213 or ENGL 214 or ENGL 303 or ENGL 304.   Offered as ENGL 305, THTR 312 and THTR 412. Prereq: Must be a student in M.A. Theater program.
THTR 414	Advanced Playwriting	3 Units	Theory and practice of dramatic writing with special focus on the craft of writing a full-length play. Offered as ENGL 314, THTR 314 and THTR 414. Prereq: Must be a student in M.A. Theater program.
THTR 416	Screenwriting	3 Units	A critical exploration of the craft of writing for film, in which reading and practicum assignments will culminate in the student submitting an original full-length screenplay. Offered as ENGL 316, THTR 316 and THTR 416. Prereq: Must be a student in M.A. Theater program.
THTR 419	Greek Tragedy: Plays and Performance in Ancient Athens	3 Units	This course provides students the opportunity to read a significant number of ancient Greek tragedies in modern English translations. We read, study, and discuss selected works by Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides, as well as selected criticism, ancient and modern, of these plays. All semester we read the plays as literature composed for performance. We study literary elements within the plays and theatrical possibilities inherent in the texts. As we read the plays, we pay close attention to the historical context and look for what each play can tell us about myth, religion, ethics, and society in ancient Athens. Finally, we give attention to the way these tragic dramas and the theater in which they were performed have continued to inspire literature and theater for thousands of years. Lectures provide historical background on the playwrights, the plays, the mythic and historical background, and possible interpretation of the texts as literature and as performance pieces. Students discuss the plays that they read in class. The course has three examinations and a final project that includes writing an essay and staging a monologue or scene from one of the tragedies. Offered as CLSC 319, CLSC 419, THTR 319, THTR 419, WLIT 319, and WLIT 419. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
THTR 422	Theater in Ancient Rome	3 Units	This course is designed as a continuation of and companion to CLSC/THTR/WLIT 319/419 Greek Tragedy: Plays and Performance in Ancient Athens, although it may be taken without having taken, or before having taken, that course. Students in Theater in Ancient Rome will read a significant number of ancient Roman plays in modern English translation and study non-literary theatrical entertainment of the Roman Republic and Empire, that may include mime and pantomime, gladiatorial shows, political speeches, courtroom drama, and various other spectacles. The dramatic texts that we shall study include the fragments of early Latin drama, selected comedies by Plautus and Terence, and the tragedies of Seneca. We shall also consider Greek and Roman literature that comments on Roman theatrical practices. These works will be read for their literary merits and theatrical possibilities, while at the same time examining them for what they can tell us about Roman civilization. Similarly, when studying the non-literary theatrical works we shall examine historical and theatrical context including archaeological evidence from theaters and amphitheaters and material remains (masks, depictions of actors and gladiators on vases, terra cotta lamps, mosaics, etc.). Finally, while the majority of the course focuses on drama originally written in Latin and theatrical entertainments performed in ancient Rome, the course may include a brief survey of selected post-classical works indebted to the tradition of Roman drama and theater. Authors that may be studied include Hrotsvitha, Marlowe, Shakespeare, Racine, Molière, and the legacy of Roman drama and theater in contemporary stage and cinema such as Sondheim's A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum. Thus a secondary concern will be to consider how and in what ways the legacy of Roman drama and theater has continued to shape the dramatic arts since antiquity.  Offered as CLSC 322, CLSC 422, THTR 322, THTR 422, WLIT 322, and WLIT 422. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
THTR 425	Development of Theater: Beginnings to English Renaissance	3 Units	This course explores the foundations of theater in Western civilization, beginning with Greece and then charting and analyzing the developments in playwriting, design, acting and theater architecture.  Students read a wide variety of plays in order to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the history of the art form, but also learn how theater has played an integral societal function as a medium of political, economic, and cultural commentary.  Development of Theater I explores developments from Aeschylus to the English Renaissance.  Offered for undergraduates as THTR 325 and WLIT 360.  Students who have taken THTR 228/WLIT 228 are not allowed to enroll in this course.  Offered as THTR 325, WLIT 360, and THTR 425. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Must be a student in M.A. Theater program.
THTR 426	Development of Theater: Renaissance to Romanticism	3 Units	This course explores the many developments in playwriting, design, acting, and theater architecture across the world.  Students read a wide variety of plays in order to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the history of the art form, but also learn how theater has played an integral societal function as a medium of political, economic, and cultural commentary.  Development of Theater II not only explores the development of theatrical conventions in Spain, England, Italy, France and other European countries that lead to the creation of modern drama, but the course also offers an in-depth look at the history and conventions of theater in India, Korea, China, and Japan.   Offered as THTR 326, WLIT 361, and THTR 426. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Must be a student in M.A. Theater program.
THTR 427	American Drama	3 Units	Designed to provide students an overview of the development of theater in the United States and to familiarize them with the work and themes of selected American playwrights.   Offered as THTR 327 and THTR 427. Prereq: Must be a student in M.A. Theater program.
THTR 429	Modern and Contemporary Drama	3 Units	This course explores the development of western drama and theatre from 1860 through present-day productions.  The course emphasizes the relationship between different theatrical representations and their historical and social context.  Shakespeare's well-known dictum that "theatre holds a mirror up to nature" is expanded when one examines who is holding that mirror, and how their actions participate in the constantly shifting construction of culture.  Given this premise, the course investigates the development of specific European cultures (England, France, Germany, and Italy) as well as other regions (the United States, South America, and Russia) through the - live and literary - representations they make of themselves.   Offered as THTR 329, WLIT 329 and THTR 429. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Must be a student in M.A. Theater program.
THTR 430	Play Directing I	3 Units	This course will begin a two-semester study of the art and craft of stage direction of plays.  Topics covered will include history of the profession, directorial theory and practice, development of skills such as text analysis, design and concept, and general problem solving.   Offered as THTR 330 and THTR 430. Prereq: Must be a student in M.A. Theater program.
THTR 431	Play Directing II	3 Units	This course continues with the basic concepts learned in THTR 330 and expands them in regard to the mechanics of production. Topics covered include ground planning and staging, working with actors, the casting process and communicating effectively with a design team. The course will culminate in a faculty-supervised directing project for public performance.  Offered as THTR 331 and THTR 431. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: Must be a student in M.A. Theater program.
THTR 473	Graduate Voice Technique I	3 Units	Assessment of students' current vocal and alignment skills. Laboratory for exploring new vocal and alignment habits supportive of healthy vocal functioning.  Exploration of the body and voice as it relates to breath, resonance, and the healthy exhalation of sound. Prereq: Must be candidate in M.F.A. Acting program.
THTR 474	Graduate Voice Technique II	3 Units	Continued laboratory for the exploration of alignment and vocal skills supportive of healthy vocal functioning. Continued exploration of the body and voice as it relates to breath, articulation, resonance, and the healthy exhalation of sound. Development of skills needed to address the specific needs of Shakespeare and Classical texts in performance. Prereq: THTR 473.
THTR 475	Graduate Voice Technique III	3 Units	The course utilizes Arthur Lessac's vocal energies and the Roy Hart singing technique in a continued laboratory for the exploration of vocal skills and healthy vocal functioning for the actor. Prereq: THTR 474.
THTR 476	Graduate Voice Technique IV	3 Units	The course is focused on increasing and enhancing the graduate student of acting's ability to handle the vocal challenges and technical demands of heightened texts. The class will use language and texts from poetry, classic novels and drama to accomplish this task. Prereq: Must be a student in M.F.A. Acting program.
THTR 479	Graduate Stage Speech I: Phonetics	2 Units	Designed to evaluate the graduate student actors' current speech skills, to teach them a stage appropriate dialect using the Skinner narrow IPA set, and to achieve a level of mastery over articulation and diction. Prereq: Must be a student in M.F.A. Acting program.
THTR 493	Graduate Study in Dramaturgy	3 Units	This course introduces students to theories of textual analysis and contextual research within the framework of theatrical performance.   Students will investigate the history and methodologies of dramaturgy, and then apply the best practices of the profession to the study and production of contemporary plays.  Because dramaturgy is a collaborative endeavor, students will participate with others in the production of a theatrical adaptation from a non-dramatic source, as well as the creation of an interdisciplinary theater event and a multi-media performance project.  By course end, students will be able to support their theatrical interests with dramaturgical insights and to work collaboratively to create productions that reflect the cultural and aesthetic diversity of the 21st century.  Students will also gain practical experience by serving as dramaturgs on a Cleveland Play House production. Prereq: Department of Theater MA Students only.
THTR 501	Dramatic Text Analysis	1 - 3 Units	An exploration to the craft of reading a theatrical text. Methods for analyzing the action and dialogue of a play will be applied to dramatic text so that the theater artist can learn to transform a one-dimensional text into a three-dimensional performance work. Prereq: Must be a graduate student in the Department of Theater.
THTR 509	Performance History	1 Unit	Research seminar that covers the major movements in performance history and acting style. Readings cover the breadth of theater history with a focus on the art of the actor. Also includes material on major stylistic movements and acting techniques and the impact on the theatrical impulse. Prereq: Must be a student in M.F.A. Acting program.
THTR 512	Graduate Audition Lab	1 - 2 Units	This class focuses on choosing and developing classical and contemporary monologues for audition purposes. Other elements of the audition process are explored including the preparation of sides for a specific role as well as casting simulations with guest directors and instructors. Prereq: Must be a student in M.F.A. Acting program.
THTR 530	Ensemble Technique	1 - 2 Units	A practicum course structured to explore the use of ensemble dynamic techniques in a rehearsal/performance environment, as well as to develop a set of exercises which encourage and sustain the actor's channels of interpersonal communication during a range of rehearsal and performance situations. Prereq: Must be a student in MFA Acting program.
THTR 531	Graduate Acting I: Performance Process	3 Units	This course is aimed toward developing a practical and cohesive acting approach. Through improvisations and structured exercises, the actor learns to employ the basic concepts of the Stanislavski System of intention, action and given circumstances in order to make acting decisions that are viable, playable, original, truthful and specific. Ensemble building and scene work also play heavily in this foundation course. Prereq: Must be a student in M.F.A. Acting program.
THTR 532	Graduate Acting II: Contemporary Scene Study	3 Units	Scene work will constitute the core of Acting II. This course will focus on developing complex and highly-nuanced character relationships, increased scene partner awareness, and effective playing of actions that emphasize clarity of communication and intent. Prereq: THTR 531.
THTR 533	Graduate Acting III: The Modernists	3 Units	The class focuses on the Modernists: Chekhov, Ibsen. The student will apply the Stanislavski System of character work and the specific tools of "Physical Acting" techniques to these playwrights through intensive scene work. The focus is also on imagery in language and clarity of subtext and imagery as it relates to the dramatic text and character intention. Prereq: THTR 532.
THTR 534	Graduate Acting IV: Shakespeare/Heightened Language	3 Units	This course explores the genre of theater loosely called "Heightened Language" and the challenges it presents for the actor. Students will complete intensive scene work on texts ranging from the Greeks, to Shakespeare, to the 19th Century Victorians, and discover the interconnectedness of the styles, and the demands they place on the actor's craft. Prereq: THTR 533.
THTR 535	Graduate Acting V: Camera Technique	3 Units	The goal of this course will be to introduce the student to fundamental aspects of creating and performing a role on camera.  Various exercises will be employed with the aim of eliciting active listening, spontaneity and a vibrant inner life.  Technical aspects such as continuity and hitting marks will be addressed, as well as the professional process involved in production as applied to varying genres of film and television. Prereq: THTR 535.
THTR 540	Professional Orientation	2 Units	This class is structured to help the third year MFA actor prepare for his/her entrance and transition to the professional arena. Students will be introduced to the world of contracts, taxes, agents and unions, and understand how to survive and thrive while pursuing a professional acting career. Guest speakers and facilitators will present material to familiarize students with the realities of a life in the arts. Prereq: Must be a student in M.F.A. Acting program.
THTR 579	Graduate Stage Speech II: Articulation	2 Units	This course will continue the work begun in THTR 479, exploring more of the International Phonetic Alphabet and developing applicable skills in articulatory sophistication. Prereq: THTR 479.
THTR 580	Graduate Stage Speech III: Dialects	2 Units	This survey course will examine the use and application of major stage dialects in the American theatre using a phonetic tool set as a basis for understanding sound substitutions. The student will also study the ways in which rhythmic changes and resonance and tension shifts affect the dialects. Prereq: THTR 579.
THTR 581	Graduate Stage Speech IV: Classical Texts	2 Units	The objective of this course is to increase and enhance the students' ability to handle the heightened language and technical demands of classical texts. The class will use poetry, first person narratives from classic novels and verse drama to accomplish this task. The class will contain a strong "verbal gym" component meant to strengthen and refine diction and standard American speech. Drills, tongue twisters, reading aloud will be part of every class. Prereq: THTR 580.
THTR 601	Special Projects	1 - 3 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
THTR 610	Professional Internship	1 - 4 Units	In the third year, the student will begin their Professional Internship with Cleveland Play House. Involvement will include: understudy assignments and an AEA contracted role in a production(s) as assigned by Cleveland Play House. Prereq: THTR 534.
THTR 611	Professional Showcase	3 Units	At the end of the curricular sequence, the graduating class presents an actors showcase, involving scenes and various special skills, to industry professionals (agents, managers, directors, artistic directors). The goal of the showcase is to present material that will illustrate the strengths of each ensemble member in order to procure professional representation. The course begins with a search for material from theatre, film and television sources. Prereq: Must be a student in M.F.A. Acting program.
THTR 630	Performance Studio	3 Units	A performance laboratory, ensemble-based practicum in which the student works to integrate effectively a wide range of performance skills culminating in a studio production.  May be taken two times in the last two semesters of graduate study. Prereq: THTR 534.
THTR 642	Thesis Portfolio I	3 Units	Course designed specifically for candidates in the Master of Fine Arts program in Acting. Graduate students enroll for the course during the fall semester of their third year of study. Work on the thesis spans three years of study based on roles the MFA actor has created. A rough draft of the thesis portfolio will be completed, according to requirements set forth in the department's MFA Handbook, and presented at the end of the fall semester of the third year to the faculty. Satisfactory completion of the portfolio is part of the requirements for awarding the Master of Fine Arts degree. Prereq: Must be a student in M.F.A. Acting program.
THTR 643	Thesis Portfolio II	3 Units	Course designed specifically for candidates in the Master of Fine Arts program in Acting. Graduate students enroll for the course during the spring semester of their third-year of study. A finalized thesis portfolio containing an in-depth exploration of at least three roles is completed, according to requirements set forth in the department's MFA Handbook. This completed document is presented at the end of the spring semester of the third year. Satisfactory completion of the portfolio is part of the requirements for awarding the Master of Fine Arts degree. Prereq: THTR 642 and must be a student in MFA Acting program.
THTR 644	M.A. Project	1 - 12 Units	Research and development of a Master of Arts project in Theater.
USNA 204	The Evolution of Scientific Ideas	3 Units	Scientific understanding has evolved over the years. There are very few beliefs about the natural world that have remained intact over the past few centuries, or even the past few decades. The chief goal of the course will be to give students an understanding of how scientific ideas change and how newer ideas supersede the old. Questions to be investigated include: What is Science? How do disciplinary scientific communities (physicists, chemists, biologists, etc.) form and identify themselves? How does the community of scientists within a discipline come to a consensus that it is time to adopt a new paradigm: What scientific, social, political, and cultural factors come into play during the periods of transition? The course will be in seminar format. The students will be given opportunities to explicitly develop critical thinking skills (the specific skills to be developed will be selected by the class from an explicit list) and writing and speaking skills. Class meetings will be used to share their research results and to study the assigned texts and papers. The students will be required to demonstrate their understanding in a variety of ways. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 211	Einstein, Space and Time	3 Units	This course will explore the profound changes in our conception of space and time brought about by Einstein's theories of special and general relativity.  As a University Seminar, it will also integrate writing and discussion about these topics into the class and explore the philosophical and technological context in which the ideas were developed. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 220	Suburban Landscapes: Nature, Technology, and Culture	3 Units	This course will examine suburban neighborhoods by focusing on the design of technology and nature in these spaces.  The way that people understand and operate in the world is so entangled with values and assumptions that the physical shape of the world cannot be separated from human culture.  In this sense, suburban landscapes are not simply neighborhoods but also examples of culture.  The form of the land and the technologies in the suburbs are continually reshaped to correspond with the cultures of the people occupying those spaces.  By studying suburban landscapes we can see how the ideas in people's heads become part of the physical world in which we live. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 226	Evolution of Human Behavior	3 Units	Human behavior is a result of the complex interplay between our genes and the environment, both of which have been shaped by evolutionary forces over millions of years.  To what extent does natural selection shape our behavior today?  Are humans naturally monogamous?  Why do conflicts arise even in our most intimate relationships?  Is human behavior ultimately in the service of reproductive success, ensuring that our genes are passed into the next generation?  This course reviews the history of evolutionary theories of mind and behavior, as well as current ideas about the ecological and genetic components of behavior.  We will examine key principles of neurobiology, sociobiology, and evolutionary psychology to critically evaluate evolutionary interpretations of human behaviors, including those comprising cultural traditions and social institutions.  Specific topics to be addressed include human mate choice, parenting strategies, interpersonal conflict, and altruism.  The course is structured as a seminar, with emphasis on discussion and formation of logical arguments. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 228	Time	3 Units	This seminar course will explore the nature of time from many stances, including those of Psychology, Biology, Technology and Philosophy. Yet time is central to Physics, and in Physics we will orient our explorations of time. Our understanding of time has sharpened a great deal in the last few centuries, the most obvious markers being Newton's Absolute time, which remains entrenched in modern culture, and its subsequent physical overthrow by Einstein's relativity. Given the physical primacy of Einstein's time, many questions arise: How malleable is the concept of time? Is there a fact of time? Can the present be defined? The past? The future? The successes of modern Cosmology lead us to ask: Was there a beginning of time? Will time end? The symmetry of fundamental physical laws with respect to the direction of time, counterpointed by asymmetric phenomena, lead to: Is there a master arrow of time? Is the flow of time an illusion? In this course we will investigate what "Time" is telling us about the natural world and ourselves. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 230	ATTENTION! Understanding the Human Attention System	3 Units	You're in a crowded room, in the middle of a heated conversation.  Suddenly you hear someone across the room say your name.  How were you able to pick out that particular sequence of sounds from all the noise around you?  Why did you even notice it, given that you were talking to someone else?  This course looks at this phenomenon and others having to do with the human attention system.  While much of what we read will be from the fields of psychology and neuroscience, we'll also consider aspects of attention that have to do with literature, the arts, and religion. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 237	Landscape History and Conservation	3 Units	Human history is intimately intertwined with the natural landscape on which it occurred.  From coastal preserves and their beach communities to Midwestern farmland and the preserved site of Thoreau's Walden Pond cabin, and at places like the Grand Canyon, the American landscape itself holds many clues to our country's natural, ecological, and cultural history.  This course will investigate the lived landscape in two ways (which have a multitude of shades to them):  as a place where humans shape the natural for their own memorial, productive, and aesthetic uses, or as a natural place that humans set aside or conserve.  We will read landscape history and conservation theory, and we will consider global practices of conservation through UNESCO's World Heritage Sites.  Class work will entail a process-oriented project on the Cleveland landscape, which students are encouraged to approach through the lens of their major.  We will visit the Wade Oval and the cultural gardens of Rockefeller Park as an example of current conservation practices working to protect the natural and cultural value of the local landscape. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 240	Technologies of the City	3 Units	Based on the premise that cities are never "finished," and constantly being remade, the University Seminar, Technologies of the City, will look at the technological and cultural history of cities from the ancient world to the present day.  Students will explore the history of building materials--wood, brick, steel, concrete, and glass--used in the construction of cities.  We will also trace the development of city infrastructure such as electricity, water and sewage systems, streets bridges, and subways.  Technological innovations, such as the automobile, will receive special consideration.  We will move moth geographically and temporally to visit the world's great cities, studying examples of significant building projects, such as the Brooklyn Bridge, the Chicago World's Fair, and Cleveland's first skyscraper, the Rockefeller Building.  The course will cover the history of the professions--engineering, architecture, and urban planning--that have contributed to the construction of cities, and will review the works of these practitioners, as well as that of artists, reformers, and utopians that have imagined new directions for the city. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 247	Epidemics in Human History	3 Units	This course will examine the role of epidemics (of all types) in human history.  Disease has shaped our society in many ways and continues to do so.  Despite the plethora of antibiotic and antiviral drugs since 1940, 90% of the decrease in (First World) infectious disease is due to simple public health measures and better hygiene.  But overuse of antibiotics increasingly is causing the rapid evolution of "superbugs" that threaten new plagues and epidemics.  Both historical and modern epidemics of plague, smallpox, Salmonella, cholera, tuberculosis, and HIV/AIDS will be examined.  The interaction of these epidemics with societies and how the epidemics influence society, cultures, art, and literature will be major topics of discussion.  The course is primarily discussion with short student presentations.  In addition, 3-4 short "Front Lines" talks by and discussion with CWRU and University Hospital clinicians will explore today's realities of epidemics, infection, and antibiotic resistance in the United States, Uganda, South Africa and elsewhere. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 249	Restoring the Great Lakes: Opportunities and Challenges	3 Units	This seminar will focus on the issues and methods of restoring the Great Lakes, with particular emphasis on public action and decision-making processes.  Students will learn about the environmental history of the lakes, as well as current challenges to improving water quality and related aspects of the ecosystem.  Technical experts, field trips, and other informational resources will enable seminar participants to engage in lively debates on the best ways to address those challenges.  Opportunities for observation of and/or direct collaboration with key stakeholders in the restoration process will enhance students' understanding of the processes by which key environmental decisions are made and implemented. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 258	Designing Urban Green Space	3 Units	In this course, we will investigate the history, theory and practical design of green space in cities.  We will focus on types of green space and their community function, relationship to commerce, aesthetics, recreation, ecology, and health in particular.  Students will engage in group projects where they locate all underused space in Cleveland (vacant space, gray or brown fields) and will propose a new use for it as green space of some kind.  Individual research projects will be related to that site.  Lively class discussion and frequent reading responses required.  Mandatory field trip to sites in downtown Cleveland. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 265	Thinking National Parks	3 Units	This seminar provides students an opportunity to explore U.S. national parks and their history of displaying both nature and culture.  This discussion-based, writing- and research-focused class requires students to examine a park system that is both extraordinarily popular and rife with controversy.  We begin with several recurring questions: Where did the national parks idea come from?  How has the park mission evolved and adapted?  Can parks be "read" as texts, and if so, how does our point of view determine what we see?  How do parks arrange displays of cultural and natural worlds, and how do they display interactions therein?  How can changing park philosophies be reflected in their physical apparatus and infrastructure?  Students will participate in regular class discussions, occasionally lead these same discussions, complete formal writing assignments, and develop a final research project.  The course readings will alternate between historical and present-day selections, so that we explore the history of U.S. national parks while simultaneously considering challenges and controversies that matter very much today.  Early readings will include John Muir and Gifford Pinchot; current trends will be explored in the writings of William Cronon, Alfred Runte, and Jennifer Price, among many others.  We will view significant portions of Ken Burns' recent PBS series The National Parks: America's Best Idea.  The ultimate "text" for the class, however, is an actual national park.  Each student will choose a national park as the basis for their semester-long project.  Students will begin with description and history of their park, and then they will explore controversies or other issues in the park, developing their own argument.  Next, students will have a chance to play architect/landscaper/park-superintendent, as they propose a change to the park that would address an existing problem or enhance the visitors' experience.  Finally, students will gather these pieces into a single coherent project, submitting a 10-15 page final essay as well as producing an engaging class presentation. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 266	Life After the Death of Print	3 Units	Around 1439, Johannes Gutenberg invented the moveable type printing press, a technological development that altered the world by ushering in an era of mass, reproducible communication.  For nearly 500 years, print technologies have dominated communications.  Scholars have shown that print's ability to disseminate information led to revolutions in art, science and politics.  In short, print technologies have largely defined what it means to be a thinking and communicating human being.  The emergence of digital technologies has altered communications in ways that are only now being understood.  This course examines how developments in digital technologies impact communication practices by threatening print's historic stronghold.  Consequently, the course also explores what impact new technologies have on human identity.  We will consider the historical development of display technologies (printed materials and digital screens) to understand what is at stake in the move from print to digital communication.  We will then investigate current phenomena associated with Web 2.0, including blogs and social networks, in order to understand how our communication choices construct and allow for our public and private identities.  Additionally, the course will examine new display technologies, such as iPhones and Kindles, that allow for the possibly constant dissemination of those identities.  Finally, we will hypothesize about how digital technologies force us to conceive of human identity differently from the ways that print invites. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 271	Gene, Environment and Behavior	3 Units	The goal of this course is to encourage students to be well informed and critical consumers of the media reports about the influence of genes and environment on human behavior. This course involves the book by Matt Ridley titled, "Genome: The autobiography of a species in 23 chapters." Ridley has a Ph.D. in zoology, worked as a journalist, science editor, and national newspaper columnist. The book devotes a chapter to each pair of human chromosomes. Each chapter focuses on the role of a gene. Ridley's book was published in 1999; therefore, students will conduct their own research to update each of the chapters in Ridley's book. The first few weeks of class will be used to provide a background on genetics research through field trips and guest lectures from CWRU genetic researchers. We will have several writing workshops spread throughout the semester to offer "Just in Time" tips needed to write critical evaluations and literature reviews. Each student will present twice during the semester. The first oral presentation will revolve around a summary, critical evaluation, and an update of the human trait presented in the Ridley book on their assigned chromosome. The presentation will be about 15 minutes with 5 minutes left for questions. Students not presenting will be assigned one of the three chromosomes (chapters) covered that day and they will each write a seminar question to pose to the class. In addition, each student will also serve as a reviewer for one of the presentations to provide constructive feedback to the presenter. The second presentation will consist of new material found by each student about genes on their chromosome. They must find another trait on their chromosome and present the most current information available on that trait. In place of a final exam, each student will turn in a research paper on their assigned chromosome. We will build these papers throughout the semester with a series of graded "checkpoint" assignments. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 285	The Science of Madness: An Historical Investigation of Mental Illness	3 Units	Since antiquity the western world's understanding of mental illness has continued to evolve.  This course will examine the trajectory of that evolution, looking at the medical theories that have influenced assumptions about the causes and treatments of mental illness from the early modern era through the twenty-first century.  Examples of questions we will investigate include: How we have defined the normal and the pathological in human mental behavior over time?  How do we explain the centuries-old correlation that medicine has made between creativity and mental illness?  Which past and present psychiatric treatments have been beneficial and which harmful?  How did Darwin's theory of evolution affect theories of mental illness (and how does it continue to do so with the advent of evolutionary psychology)?  How have changing philosophies of science affected the research and practice of psychology?  How and why do the sciences of the mind--psychiatry, psychoanalysis, clinical psychology, psychopharmacology, the cognitive neurosciences--claim so much scientific authority and exert influence over our lives today?  As a frame work for this inquiry, the class will use the concept of paradigm shifts as Thomas Kuhn defines in his classic work, the Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 287B	Electrical and Electronic Devices in Our Lives	3 Units	Electrical circuits and embedded microprocessors control a great many aspects of our daily life including the power grid, medical devices, consumer electronics and infrastructure. This seminar will introduce students to electricity, electrical circuits, measurement, the Arduino microprocessor development platform, the engineering design process and how the above devices work. Laboratory time will allow students to create circuits and programs to interact with and control some aspect of the environment. As part of the course, students will examine how simple errors encountered during laboratory work compare to the errors and oversights which have caused disasters. A project will ask students to design a simple device to address a problem or need and will provide the foundation for writing assignments at the end of the course. Students will make use of the Sears Design Laboratory and the Think[Box] facility.  This course cannot be taken by students who previously took FSNA 137 Volts, Amps, Bits and Bytes. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 287C	Animals and Humans: Making Sense of the Human-Animal Bond	3 Units	Humans have an incredibly complex relationship with (non-human) animals.  We eat some animals and consider other animals members of our family.  We worship some animals and vilify others.  This class examines the complexities of our relationship with (non-human) animals.  Through exploring human emotional, practical, and epistemological ties with animals, this course examines what it means to be animal as well as what it means to be human.  We analyze the following questions.  How do we come to know and understand animals?  What are the issues surrounding the use of animals in scientific speculation, classification and experimentation, such as vivisection, cloning and the human-animal relationship in technoscience?  Do some non-human animals possess material culture, social morality, and emotions such as grief and sadness?  Why do animals populate our popular culture and art? Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 287D	Native American Environmentalism: Sustainability and Contemporary Energy	3 Units	This seminar course will focus on three main areas of Native American environmentalism.  First, we will learn about Native Cosmologies and historical connections to the land while exposing the controversial relationship of Native Americans to land and wildlife within the myth of the "ecological Indian." Second, we will examine how Native Americans have responded to toxic pollution of indigenous lands as a result of manufacturing and uranium mining, which some refer to as "environmental racism." We will also learn about tribes who choose to host nuclear waste facilities as an exercise of their sovereignty and as an avenue of economic development.  Finally, we will investigate initiatives by tribes and coalitions in land and water stewardship, investment in "new" energies and technologies, sustainability of lands (prairie and forest restoration), reclamation of waterways (dam removal), and wildlife management, to name a few. Students will inform their critical thinking about Native American environmentalism with a variety of texts and websites of scholarly and public opinion, scientific data, native knowledge, and historic fact.  The seminar will include collaborative learning and presentation projects in which students will pursue research topics related to energy development, stewardship and sustainability, or wildlife management and harvesting. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 287E	Evolution and the Modern World	3 Units	Modern evolutionary theory has influenced all aspects of biology and the clinical sciences.  It has, moreover, resulted in novel ways to think about many of the social sciences.  This class will focus on how the concept of evolution has dramatically altered the way we view human anatomy, physiology, and behavior. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 287G	Genes, Genomes and Society	3 Units	2013 marks the 60th anniversary of the discovery of the double helix of DNA and the 10th anniversary of the sequencing of the first human genome.  Advances in genetics (the study of individual genes), and genomics (the study of an entire genome) have fundamentally altered our understanding of biology.  In this seminar, we will focus on topics covered by the mainstream press.  We will explore the science behind the news and discuss the philosophical, ethical and societal concerns raised by these scientific advances.  Topics will include: the dangers and benefits of genetically modified crops; genetics and the conservation of endangered species; learning about human biology and disease from yeast, flies, worms and fish; the use and potential misuse of genetic fingerprinting by government agencies; genetic testing; personalized medicine; and issues of genetic privacy. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 287H	Plants in Medicine	3 Units	Plants have always been the basis of medicinal treatments, and as they continue to be essential to modern forms of medicine, alternative and traditional alike.  In this course, we will consider the history of how humans have used particular plants for medicinal purposes, such as the cinchona tree (Cinchona officinalis) for quinine, willow bark (Salix) for aspirin, and the yew tree (Taxus baccata) for the cancer medication paclitaxel.  By investigating how a plant is used medicinally through time, we will also come to understand the culture that used it and how they conceived of health in relationship to nature.  We will read texts that show how a plant's medicinal uses can be tied to colonialism and global exploration.  For example, the first botanical gardens were collections of medicinal plants cultivated for use and experimentation, often containing non-native plant-based cures discovered through colonial contact.  While this is not a course in botany per se, we will be discussing basic plant biology, cultivation practices, and the contemporary science of using plants as the basis for pharmaceutical cures.  Students should be active course participants in class discussion and on field trips.  Writing instruction will focus on research-based argument, and students will complete a researched essay focusing on a medicinal plant of their choice. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 287J	Transportation in American Life	3 Units	We will explore the critical role of transportation in the development of our cities, regions, states, and nation. The course will consider the historic role of transportation, its current role, and what role it might play in the future. Transportation will be viewed in the context of national policies, overall political will, and our culture at large.  Since colonial times, transportation, in its many forms, has been the subject of intense debate, governmental policies, as well as the subject of public and private investment. We will see how certain individuals and groups used ego, power, and wealth to use transportation for shaping the nation's commerce, travel patterns, and physical appearance. We'll also see the evolution of government and business in transportation decisions and funding.  Finally, because of transportation's daily impact, we will look at current issues as part of every class. We will especially focus on the transportation issues of northeast Ohio, a microcosm of national transportation issues. Some of these issues include funding, decision-making, land use, "suburban sprawl," and economic development. We'll also look at transportation issues specific to the University Circle area such as the Health Line and the proposed "Opportunity Corridor." Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 287K	Human Research Ethics: Scientific Truth vs. Cultural Belief	3 Units	Scientific breakthroughs in genetics, neuroscience, and behavioral psychology have allowed us to learn more about ourselves than ever before. But how much do we really want to know - and who gets to decide? Is DNA our destiny? Should the quest for scientific knowledge trump cultural belief? How does society balance risk to a few in the face of the needs of the many? Using a blend of historical documents and literary examples, we will examine the evolution of the ethical standards that govern how doctors experiment on their patients. We will also debate the hard choices that medical researchers make when the quest for scientific truth intersects with cultural belief. Finally, we will apply what we have learned to find solutions to real-world ethical problems in medical research. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 287P	Women and Science: Changing Paradigms	3 Units	Is science objectively neutral in that true scientific knowledge would be independent of the discoverer? In this view, the scientific discoverer is more like a midwife that brings forth pre-existing knowledge to the world. Or - is scientific knowledge guided and shaped by the people who practice science, in which case it is influenced by the social context in which it occurs, making the scientist more like a sculptor who creates something new using the tools that are currently available.  In this course we will examine this second question by looking specifically at the relationship of gender to science through several lenses. One approach we will use is make case studies of the lives of major women scientists and the way that their gender impacted their work, from the type of scientific research they pursued, the kind of support and encouragement that they obtained as they proceeded in their careers, to the rewards and recognition (or the lack of them) that their work received from their peers.  Using a more conjectural line of inquiry, we will also consider the role that gender might have played in developing scientific theories and whether there can be such categories as "masculinist" and "feminist" science. We will conclude this part of our inquiry with an analysis of the current state of science and how well these approaches reflect the way science is pursued today.  A third issue involves looking at the relationship of gender and science but from the opposite direction. In other words, we will consider how science has influenced our understanding of gender, rather than how gender has influenced science. Over time, scientific ideas about the physiological and intellectual differences between males and females have changed dramatically several times with major political and sociological ramifications. Consequently, we will examine the science of gender in its cultural and political context from antiquity through the twentieth century.   In order to explore these interweaving threads, we will be taking an interdisciplinary approach that will draw on the history and philosophy of science (particularly Thomas Kuhn's The Revolution of Scientific Ideas), as well as on anthropology and cultural theory. By the conclusion of the course we will have examined the scientific evidence that has supported assumptions about gender in various philosophical paradigms, including humanism, rationalism (i.e., Enlightenment philosophy), nineteenth century moralism, modernism, and postmodernism. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 287S	Society and Natural Resources	3 Units	The relationship between humans and the natural world can be defined in large part by how societies manage natural resources. In this seminar, students will analyze how society-environment interactions have undergone substantial shifts over time...from John Locke's Labor Theory of Value and the rise of utilitarian conservation to more recent approaches based on ecosystem management that emphasize ecological integrity and stakeholder collaboration. Course readings will challenge students to think critically about how humans conceptualize and impact the environment. Class time will be spent discussing the evolution of effective human-ecological systems interactions as outlined in the readings, as well as reviewing student reflection papers that connect course concepts to real word scenarios. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 287T	Conflicts and Controversies in American Science and Technology	3 Units	How do changes in science and technology affect American life? How do cultural ideas shape scientific practice? Is technological progress inevitable, or do we get to decide what changes we want and which ones we don't? How do we make ethical choices about science and technology in a world with inherent power imbalances?  This course provides an introduction to thinking through these questions by presenting works by historians, anthropologists, political scientists, philosophers, journalists, and others to explore a range of social issues in modern science and technology. After two weeks of introduction, the course is divided into four sections: (a) Biology, Biotech, and Biomedicine; (b) Science Policy and the Politics of Science; (c) Problems in Social Science; and (d) Computers and Other Thinking Machines. While the course's content is arranged around these topics, its main purposes are to develop critical thinking skills around ubiquitous and contentious subjects of science, technology, power, culture, and values as well as to hone skills in reading, speaking, research, and essay writing. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 287Y	Large Scale Energy Storage	3 Units	In our wired society, energy storage for the distribution of electric energy is a major "game changer."  Efficient and economic large-scale energy storage will help facilitate the growth of renewable energy in the market, as well as increase the overall efficiency of our current electric energy resources.  So what needs to happen before we can begin to enjoy these benefits?  This course will examine the broad challenges of large-scale energy storage.   In what ways do our current technologies prevent us from storing large amounts of energy efficiently and conveniently?  How has the marketplace helped or hindered technological improvement?  How might government policy encourage advancements in energy storage technologies?  Major topics of the course include the global and US energy outlook; the relationship between energy storage, delivery, and use; the role of energy storage for renewable energy implementation; characteristics and challenges of different energy storage technologies; the potential political, public policy, economic, and environmental impact of large-scale energy storage; and approaches to energy storage in other parts of the world.  Although this course is designed for students from all disciplines, all students will be expected to do some quantitative analysis Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 287Z	Simple Harmonies, Complex Meanings: Music, A Human Obsession	3 Units	Throughout history and across cultures, the act of creating and enjoying music remains a prominent and defining element of the human species.  What is its purpose and role within our lives?  To what extent do we actively and passively engage with music on a daily basis?  Do perceptions of music differ from individual to individual and culture to culture, or can we consider music to be a universal language?  This course will utilize neurological findings and representative case studies to examine the cognitive processes associated with the perception of music and to investigate the basis of our obsession with music. Topics may include the development of musical preference, how societal influences affect our perception of music, and the role of expertise in the consumption of music. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 288B	The Green Energy Transformation in Germany	3 Units	This seminar introduces students to the development and successes of green technologies in Germany.  We will examine the proactive development of renewable energy and energy conservation technologies, commonly referred to as Energiewende, that was started by the German Green movement and promoted by Germany's innovative renewable energy policies.  We will consider such questions as: What are the implications of this German success story, both for the US and the rest of the world?  What lessons can be applied to other situations?  What factors might limit the utility of those lessons?  In the process of our investigation, we will examine such important issues as globalization, resource finiteness, and sustainability challenges, including economic crises, climate change, energy insecurity, and global competition. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 288C	Physics for Future Innovators & World Leaders	3 Units	We live in an increasingly technological society.  Advances in technology improve our lives in countess ways, but they sometimes produce problems and challenges that are so complex that the average business or political leader may not understand them--and therefore cannot make effective decisions to address them.  Whether the problem is what to do about climate change, deciding on which sources of energy are worthy of investment, updating the electrical grid, or how to deal with terrorist threats, we will be able to find the best solutions only if our leaders have an adequate understanding of the underlying physical principles (e.g., energy, force, space, radiation, electricity, and exponential growth), and where to find credible information that will assist in answering key questions.  This course is designed to equip students with that knowledge.  We will also explore various "conversation" that pertain to the above issues with the goal of gaining a better understanding of differing points of view (e.g., reporter, scientist, business person, politician, parent, student, people from different cultures), and how rudimentary understanding of the science behind some of our most pressing technological problems can affect a person's stance or actions.  This seminar is appropriate for undergraduates of any major. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 288G	Sense and Sensibility: Sensing, Information, and Control	3 Units	The control of systems has been crucial to technology development since antiquity and has been the key to ushering in some of the biggest transformations of the world including the industrial revolution, the age of aviation, and the modern computer era.  Control systems permeate our world and many of the technologies we take for granted and modern life as we know it would not be possible without them. This seminar examines the questions of "What is the role of feedback control in both creating technology and understanding the natural world?" and "How have these roles evolved and interacted with one another?"  To this end, beginning with control in antiquity and early industrial control systems and continuing into the present, the design and implementation of feedback to regulate system behavior and control programs to direct processes will be explored. Early industrial control systems corresponding to feedback control systems and control programs, respectively, and their continued evolution will be traced and the impact of their integration in the modern era will be used to expose the roles of observation, information, and computation in achieving control objectives.  Finally, this seminar will address the future of control systems including the incorporation of new design paradigms such as biomimetic and biologically-inspired control systems, their application to large scale systems and networks, and the new understanding of biological systems engendered by these new developments and applications. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 288I	Beyond Silicon Valley: Growing Entrepreneurship in Transitioning Economies	3 Units	The path for entrepreneurs to grow their companies outside of well-developed entrepreneurial ecosystems like Silicon Valley is challenging. Most markets around the world do not look like Silicon Valley and they never will. But there are other models to support new businesses. In transitioning markets (where entrepreneurs do not have much access to private sector financing), government officials, donors, and business leaders are experimenting with creative approaches to support the growth of entrepreneurs.   Cleveland is one such place exploring innovative approaches to support new businesses. For over ten years, there has been a massive intervention of government and donor resources to cultivate this entrepreneurial ecosystem.  Has this intervention worked in Cleveland?  How should success be measured?  How does Cleveland's approach differ from approaches elsewhere around the world?    In an unusual twist for a SAGES seminar, the regular classroom discussions will be complemented by your enrollment in a massive open online course (MOOC) that I developed for CWRU. The MOOC is called "Beyond Silicon Valley:  Growing Entrepreneurship in Transitioning Economies" and examines the Cleveland case study in depth.  The course has attracted over 44,000 students from 190 countries since its launch in April 2014. So, not only will you explore how communities around the world support entrepreneurship, you will also learn about the rapidly developing field of online learning and MOOCs. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 288J	Sustainable Energy: Resources, Technologies and Impact	3 Units	We hear about sustainable energy but what does that mean?  What energy sources are considered sustainable and why?  What fraction of our energy needs is likely to come from sustainable energy in the future?  Are these estimates reasonable and what are the technological and societal challenges to broader use of sustainable energy?  This seminar will explore these and other questions as we learn about energy resources, technologies and solutions that affect our lives and our planet today and in the future.  We will evaluate (from a scientific, mathematical and societal perspective) the trade-offs and uncertainties of various energy systems and explore a framework for assessing possible solutions. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 288K	Burn, Baby, Burn!	3 Units	In the title of his novel Farenheit 451, Ray Bradbury was referring to the autoignition temperature for paper. But why does cellulose burn at 451 degrees and not some other temperature? Why do other materials ignite at other temperatures? What exactly happens when materials burn? How can we apply an understanding of the chemistry of combustion to various engineering and social challenges? For example, how does one test flammability? How can we use this knowledge to reduce fire accidents, for example by producing less flammable materials? To inform our investigation, we will read about the history of fire and society, experiment with the basics of materials combustion and testing, and observe how this knowledge is applied at a flammability testing facility. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 288M	Spirits and Synapses	3 Units	This seminar is designed to explore the exciting new advances in understanding sleep and how nighttime sleep impacts daily activities.  The seminar will begin with a brief and general overview of the human brain during sleep and how brain activity varies during sleep.  We will then consider various questions related to sleep. Why do we do sleep? What makes sleep so mysterious and interesting to think about? What are dreams? Why do we sleepwalk? How does a basic understanding of neurophysiology help us understand sleep and its importance for health? How does technology influence our sleep? Our discussions will also extend to the ethical and social implications associated with sleep disorders including self-imposed sleep loss and corresponding personal and legal liabilities.   Readings and assignments will include overviews of comparative sleep durations between species including humans, and current sleep testing technologies and their application to modern medicine.  In addition to reading, discussing, and writing about sleep, this course will use role-playing as an experiential means of understanding the ethical dilemmas associated with sleep loss. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 288N	Engineering Water	3 Units	The systems that deliver fresh, clean water and take away dirty water are marvels of engineering. The advancement of societies and improvement in the human condition is intricately linked to our ability to engineer water. Will there be enough drinkable water to satisfy future needs? What is the state of water treatment and delivery, and is it secure?  What are the political and social implications of water scarcity? This course will explore the history of water supply, developments in infrastructure, and emerging technologies to meet water needs. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 288O	Our Perplexing Universe: From Pluto to Cosmology	3 Units	Varied and extensive observations over the past century have dramatically changed our understanding of the universe and led to the current era of precision cosmology.  Despite the immense progress, several key puzzles about the nature and makeup of the universe remain. How do we make sense of our universe? Why do these questions persist, even with our continued efforts and advanced technologies?  In this course, we will consider many of the "big questions" about the cosmos, how our views of it have evolved, and speculate on some of the outstanding problems in modern cosmology. Our inquiry will range from Pluto's planetary status to the Big Bang model and the evidence for dark matter and dark energy, with a special emphasis on the challenge of elucidating these complex phenomena to a wide audience. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 288R	Data Acquisition and the Internet of Things	3 Units	The Internet of Things (IoT) is the network of physical objects or "things" embedded with electronics, software, sensors, and network connectivity, which enable these objects to collect and exchange data. Example objects include garage door minders that send texts when we have forgotten to close them or cars that report driving habits to insurance companies. This class proposes to explore the question "What is involved in creating an 'Internet of Things' device and what might the future of the IoT look like?"  Virtually everyone benefits from the Internet of Things, but for most individuals the IoT is little understood.  The goal here is to demystify the IoT by engaging students in a guided hands-on IoT project that begins with data acquisition and concludes in a working device.  Through the project, readings, and discussion, students will be challenged to consider a future world that is even more connected than today and to consider the practical, societal and ethical issues that the IoT creates. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 288S	Sand to Smartphone: Silicon and its Applications	3 Units	Silicon is the second most abundant element found on our planet. Over the last century, science has allowed us to figure out how to take something as common as beach sand and to use it to create the sophisticated products on which our modern society depends.  In this seminar we will explore the use of silicon in everything from transistors to complex microprocessors to smartphones to solar cells and sensors.   We will seek to understand the following sorts of questions: What properties make this element so useful?  What are the processes by which we take this material and turn it into the technologically sophisticated devices?  How did people figure out that silicon could be used to make these advanced devices? Did they anticipate all these uses? Are there other materials that might in the future replace silicon for these purposes?  What are the benefits and drawbacks of silicon relative to other materials? To help students more fully understand how silicon devices work, they will work in groups to design a simple device. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 288W	Medieval Sciences and Human Difference: How Did Medieval Peoples Define Humanity?	3 Units	Since the beginning of recorded history, humans have employed different approaches to defining themselves in relation to the natural world. Along with folklore, religion and philosophy, science has been an important means to define concepts we now refer to as race/ethnicity, dis/ability, sexuality, and gender. However, what constituted science and scientific inquiry varied widely based on culture and historical context. Most recently, our advancing understanding of genetics has produced ever more nuanced definitions of human difference, even as we have come to recognize that such explanations often compete with theories that are grounded in social and cultural values, rather than scientific observation. How did people explain human diversity in the 1000 years before the Scientific Revolution unfolded in Europe?  In this seminar, we will investigate how different medieval cultures explained humanity and human diversity by sampling examples of medical observation, philosophy, theories about the natural world, cultural prejudice, and religious belief. In particular, we will consider how Greek, Roman, Chinese, Indian, Islamicate, and early European theories of human difference shaped justifications for conquest as, gender roles and sexuality, often in surprising ways. Questions we will ask include: How did medieval people differentiate humans from animals? Did they use the same categories of race, gender, and sexuality that we use? How did scientific thinking evolve to construct these taxonomies of difference? How were ideas shared cross-culturally? To explore these questions, we will read primary texts in translation from the medieval period. Through our discussions, we will consider not only what other approaches to defining human differences can teach us, but how they provide historical insight into frameworks and assumptions about diversity today. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 289A	Antibiotics: From Miracle Drugs to Superbugs	3 Units	Since the discovery of penicillin in 1928, antibiotics have become an essential drug in the treatment and prevention of bacterial infections. They are used to cure sexually transmitted diseases, to ward off complications after surgery, and to boost the yield and safety of our food supply. This widespread use has created a significant problem: antibiotic-resistant "superbugs" are emerging at an alarming rate. It has been estimated that the useful lifetime of an antibiotic is only eight years. What can physicians, patients, policy-makers, corporations, and consumers do to address this trend? In this seminar, we will examine the science and history of antibiotics, some of the reasons for their overuse, and possible solutions to the problem of antibiotic resistance. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 289B	Everyday Toxic Chemicals	3 Units	Each of us uses hundreds of chemicals every day.  While many of these chemicals are designed to make our products safer, cheaper, more convenient to use, and more effective, they can also present risks to ourselves and to the environment. Certainly, there are times when the benefits of using toxic chemicals outweigh the risk. For example, if you were on a ship that had caught fire, you would probably want to use the best possible firefighting foam, even if it were toxic. On the other hand, if you were choosing which microwave popcorn to buy, you might choose the one that did not use a cancer-causing chemical on the bags, even though it made them less grease-proof. How do we determine whether a chemical is toxic? Who decides when the risks outweigh the benefits? In this seminar, we will analyze the lifecycle of everyday products such as food packaging and shampoo, tracing their path from production, to use, to final place in the environment. We will also examine methods to evaluate the risk chemicals present to ourselves and to wildlife, and how these evaluation paradigms inform regulations. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 289C	Gender and Technology	3 Units	Technology has become an essential part of our daily life--the way we experience the world and think about it--and, as such, is also central to how we understand our identities and status. This seminar will explore the ways in which gender and technology define and redefine each other, considering both how gender shapes technology and the technological professions, and how technology itself produces ideas and practices of gender and sexuality. While the course will focus on gender and sexuality, we will also examine how they intersect with other categories such as class, race, and ethnicity. How does technology offer possibilities for new social relations? What role have women played in the development of technology? How does technology both challenge and maintain gender, race, and class hierarchies? How does technology shape our understanding of sexuality and gender roles? Why are there so few women in STEM? What is the impact of feminism on technological innovations and can we create a feminist technology? The course will examine these questions through a focus on three thematic units: Gender of Technology, Gender in Technology, and the Technology of Gender, looking at historical and contemporary developments from the nineteenth century to the present. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 289D	The Practice of Environmental Justice	3 Units	More than 50 years ago, Rachel Carson published her groundbreaking work Silent Spring, which helped to sound the alarm about the dangers of using certain kinds of petrochemical pesticides on our farms, gardens, and public lands. She showed that the physical environment, far from being a pristine wilderness isolated from human activity, is actually a sphere we need to monitor with care. If we fail to do so, we risk poisoning ourselves.  In this class, we use Carson as an introduction to the field of environmental justice, defined as the convergence of social justice and environmental movements. Environmental justice exists today in three broad areas: social and political activism in local and international communities; legal and policy structures and initiatives; and academic contributions across many disciplines. Students will read articles from these perspectives, and we will encounter difficult ethical problems, including the fact that poor and minority communities are disproportionately exposed to toxic sites. Students will collaborate with peers in researching an environmental justice site or problem, and everyone will produce an independently written and researched argument that makes a specific proposal for change. We will use the environment of Cleveland and northeast Ohio as our starting point for studying pollution, recovery, and the many ways that environmental justice might help communities to thrive. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 289E	Medieval Robots	3 Units	The medieval world had robots. Some were housed in medieval churches where altarpieces with angels could move, ascending and descending during celebrations. Others appeared in travel narratives like those of Marco Polo. During his visit to the Mongols, the merchant and explorer described gold peacocks whose wings flapped and mechanical drinking fountains. Still others are detailed in literature. Authors of romances have Arthur's knights fighting automaton warriors to gain entry into castles and receiving gifts like teleporting brass horses. While machines in the medieval period were not as ubiquitous as they are in our modern lives, they posed many of the same questions and concerns that we have about our own technology. Writers frequently incorporated robots into travel narratives and poetry to identify exotic or foreign cultures, and such details can tell us much about racial and political identity in the period. Further, automatons and machines could be used as examples of dangerous luxury or viewed as marvels of engineering that challenged the boundaries between what was created by human hands and by God. This class will use a variety of texts and artifacts--medieval literature, blueprints, and art alongside current writings about the ethics of AI--to think about the role of machines in the medieval world and in our own modern lives. In addition to talking and writing about examples of medieval machines and technology, students will also build their own machines using think[box]. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 289F	Biology of Sleep and Dreams	3 Units	Sleep is a fundamental to human survival, yet the physical and emotional components of sleep are only partially understood. In this seminar, students will investigate unanswered questions about the biology of sleep and dreams, including how sleep impacts and is impacted by wakefulness. We will read about and discuss the meaning of consciousness and the changes that occur in the body during wakefulness, sleep, and dreaming. And we will examine these states primarily from the biological perspective, with attention to the psychological and social influences and effects as well. In applying these perspectives, students will develop familiarity with approaches used to study sleep physiology, including the use of objective measures of altered states of consciousness, as well as narrative descriptions of individuals' experiences when normal sleep patterns are disrupted. In addition, students will investigate their own sleep and dreams. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 289G	Exploring the Drivers of FinTech	3 Units	The field of finance has experienced a burst of technological advances that have disrupted and transformed the traditional methods of accessing, allocating, and transferring capital. Understanding the evolution of traditional finance methods is increasingly important for meaningfully distinguishing the advantages and disadvantages of traditional versus emerging methods and models.  Unfortunately, many people's exposure to this revolution is limited to two ideas that are prevalent in the media:  crypto-currencies and disruption.  While these are key pieces of FinTech, to really appreciate the change it is necessary to understand the three pillars of innovation that are driving it.  This course will provide the forum to gain an understanding of those three pillars of FinTech innovation: the Internet of Things, Artificial Intelligence, and Blockchain.  Armed with this understanding we will explore how they are changing finance broadly, how that may impact the need for regulation, how it is driving change in social acceptance of conducting financial transactions, and how it raises possible concerns in new areas like the need for privacy and security.  More technology may not always be the right answer. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 289H	You Are What You Eat	3 Units	The atoms from the foods that you eat are used to build your body, from your skin and hair to your blood, nerves, muscles, bones, and organs, you are literally--as the saying goes--what you eat. We know how food affects the health of individuals, but we can also use scientific techniques to determine the diet of groups of people past and present. This understanding allows us to explore a variety of important questions. How has diet affected human evolution? Why is diet so important for defining a culture? How are current dietary habits changing who we are and how we live? This class reviews what food humans evolved to eat in terms of biological need, but also explores how adaptive diets allow us to navigate a changing environment. We will also examine how diet continues to affect the creation of our individual and collective identities. Using key principles from anthropology, public health, and evolutionary medicine, we will analyze the ways we reconstruct, judge, and intervene in human diets. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 289N	The Mind's Essential Tension	3 Units	The idea that the mind is fundamentally divided has been around from ancient to modern times. Sometimes this division is explicitly claimed to be a critical feature of human nature; other times it is expressed as different ways of being-in or experiencing the world; in yet other cases the focus is on contrasting domains that the mind either apprehends or creates. Examples include: yin vs. yang, spiritual vs material, numinous vs. mundane, masculine vs. feminine, mind vs. body/matter, theoretical vs. practical reason, science vs. arts/humanities, reason vs. passion, normative vs descriptive, fact vs. value, poetry vs. prose, to have vs. to be, doing vs. being, left brain vs. right brain, empathizing vs. systemizing, thinking fast vs. slow. There can be no doubt that the notion of a divided mind has proven intuitively appealing to many. However, to what degree is such an idea supported by careful and rigorous scholarship? Each of the claimed divisions listed above has been critiqued, often ferociously and with good reason. However, there is also a compelling case to be made for the presence of a division. Strong examples come from numerous disciplines: from philosophy, work on ethics and aesthetics, in the Continental tradition, and on the problems of consciousness and free will; from psychology, work on decision making (prospect theory) and thinking styles; from neuroscience, work on the network structure of the brain. In this class, we will be focused on asking the following questions: Is there a fundamental division in the mind? If so, what is the nature of the division? Why is it helpful to claim a division--what work does it do? How is it unhelpful? To what degree are apparent divisions products of culture and context, vs. biology? How might a scientific account of the division transform our understanding of historically influential divisions? How might historical and/or philosophical work inform current scientific research? Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 289Q	Unsustainable Fashion: The Environmental Impact of Plastics in Textiles	3 Units	The emergence of the plastics industry in the 20th century revolutionized textile fabrication. Rayon and Nylon became inexpensive alternatives to silk. Polyester helped keep clothes wrinkle-free and easy to care for. Performance fleece and faux fur provided alternatives to materials harvested from animals. At the same time, however, textile manufacturing is one of the most important polluting industries in the world, producing toxic chemicals that contaminate water, soil, and the plants and animals that we eat. Therefore, the modern fashion industry is unsustainable and is the 2nd largest water-polluting industry and is responsible for 10% of the carbon footprint in the world. Sustainable fashion is a philosophy that involves creating a strategy to make a change in different levels from textile fabrication to design, production of fashion items and consumers' attitude. What would it take to make fashion more sustainable? Is it possible to re-think textile fabrication and fashion design? Can fashion be "plastic-free?"  What role can marketing and consumer behavior play in a more sustainable fashion of the future? In this seminar, we will investigate the history of fashion and textile fabrication, especially how the emergence of plastics revolutionized the industry.  We will also examine the social and environmental impacts of the plastics-based fashion industry, considering sustainable solutions, as well as the challenges they face. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 289R	Science on Trial	3 Units	Universities, laboratories, and scientific journals are not the only places where questions of science are debated and settled; in the modern era, they are often decided in courts of law as well.  In this seminar, we will focus on a range of examples in which scientific questions have been adjudicated in the courtroom.  Questions to be considered are: How are judges or juries supposed to evaluate questions of science?  Who decides what counts as science, or what counts as scientific consensus?  What counts as expertise, and what counts as evidence when it comes to deciding a case that hinges on questions of science?  Are legal facts ever different from scientific facts? By the end of the course, students will have a new understanding of the role of science in the modern world and the complicated intersections between science, society, and the law. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 289T	Community Problem Solving	Applications of Design Thinking	3 Units	In this seminar, we will evaluate design thinking, a systematic process for developing creative, human-centered solutions. To test our thinking, we will also seek a solution to a real problem in the CWRU/Cleveland community. Design thinking has been embraced by leading tech companies and universities around the world. The inventors of the first Apple mouse and the first e-book, for instance, used design thinking to develop these innovative products. The many proponents of design thinking claim that it can be applied to problems in any field: medicine, politics, the arts. You can even use it to build a well-lived, joyful life! Design thinking also has critics who argue that design thinking is merely a repackaging of old ideas in modern techno-speak. Clearly, human creativity and problem solving existed long before we even had the words "design thinking." Why do we even need a systematic process for something that people do on their own every day? We will examine the theory and practice of design thinking, not only by critiquing the arguments pro and con, but also by applying it to a real-world problem ourselves. Working in teams, we will use a variety of CWRU resources, including faculty and staff expertise, think[box], and other labs, to identify, test, and implement a solution integrating technology and the human experience. Along the way, we will also critically evaluate the design thinking process itself. Does design thinking always lead to the best available solution? If not, why not? What other approaches might work as well or better? Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 289U	Pipes, Potholes, and Pathogens: Infrastructure Issues in the USA	3 Units	The poor condition of the nation's infrastructure--its roads, railways, bridges, tunnels, drinking water systems, wastewater systems, and more--has been widely reported. In fact, the infrastructure is so bad that fixing it offers a rare opportunity for bipartisanship. And yet, as the grades given by the American Society of Civil Engineers in its quadrennial Report Card indicate, conditions remain dismal. In this seminar, we will study the structures and systems that constitute national infrastructure, the tools used to evaluate its condition, and the challenges of monitoring, maintaining, and repairing it. What metrics are used to grade various infrastructure categories? Do these metrics accurately describe conditions in a meaningful way? What does it mean to say that the condition of bridges, for example, is a "C" or a "D?" How should government agencies use this information when prioritizing spending? Is it better to repair or replace? Are some categories more important than others? Is it better, for example, to address drinking water before dams, or sewers before roads? How should spending be distributed geographically and socially? Should spending be spread evenly, or is it better to target urban, suburban, or rural settings? To answer these questions, we will investigate examples from Northeast Ohio. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USNA 289X	Sexual Revolutions	3 Units	Modern American society, from the late nineteenth century on, saw major changes to human behavior and understanding of sexuality, often seen as a "revolution." This course will examine these changes from the late Victorian Period to present day, focusing on the social and technological developments during this time period. In this course, we will explore the rise of sexology as a field of science, the development of reproductive and sexual technologies, as well as the social, cultural, and political forces that shape ideas about sex. By analyzing both primary and secondary documents, we will investigate what is the idea of sexual freedom and how it intersected with categories of race, religion, and class, as well as what constitutes sexual liberation and oppression. By looking at how issues of sexuality were central to political debates during the twentieth century, students will revisit definitions of sex, gender, identities, revolution, and backlash. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSNA/USNA; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 201	Society and Technology: How Do They Impact One Another?	3 Units	This course focuses on a systematic analysis of the relationships between society, and the specific institutional elements of technology and technological innovation. It describes the social aspects of computers and related technologies and explores the ways in which these technologies influence and impact organizations and individuals. The course explores the design, use and cultural significance of technologies and uses a historical focus to assess the integration of technology into all aspects of our society. The restructuring of traditional human interaction by information technology will provide a contemporary focus for the course. Offered in a seminar format, the course will provide opportunities for scholarly discussion, systematic inquiry and written communication. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 209	Face First	3 Units	Human beings greet the world face first. In fact, the ability to process facial features seems to be innate. A baby easily recognizes its mother's face yet the most powerful computers have difficulty using facial features to identify people. This is because all human faces are similar while fine details make each face unique. This course will begin by studying the human face as an anatomic construction of hard and soft tissue skeletal components. We will discuss how we use anatomic facial features to recognize individuals. One homework exercise will be to construct faces using an FBI identikit. Each student will create an FBI composite sketch of their own face. Seminar time will then be used to view each sketch and try to match the sketch with the seminar participant. Discussion will focus on how facial anatomy is similar or different. Following this introduction, the seminar will shift focus from anatomy to sociology. We will discuss facial attractiveness and beauty. Seminar topics will also include manipulation of facial appearance i.e., cosmetics, body piercing, veils, and plastic surgery. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 234	Questions of Identity	3 Units	Who we are informs the ways in which we act in the world.  How we respond to society in the individual, local, and global community is impacted by the way we see ourselves, the way others see us, and the way we see others.  Who am I?  How do I look at myself in relationship to others?  How does the way in which society views me affect the way I think of myself?  How have writers, historians, and philosophers dealt with the challenges of self and group identity?  We will explore these issues through readings from the Civil Rights Era, the Holocaust, and the period of decolonization in Africa. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 243	The Art of Fact	3 Units	As evidenced by the tragedy that unfolded in New Orleans in the wake of Hurricane Katrina, we ignore the consequences of endemic poverty at our peril.  How do you evacuate a city filled with thousands of people too poor to own cars?  Where do you house them after they've been rescued from their drowned neighborhoods?  Although Cleveland won't likely be erased by flood, it's one of the poorest big cities in the nation making it vulnerable to disaster in times of crisis and an incubator for a host of thorny social problems.  Often, it's up to journalists to bring attention to these issues, give voice to the voiceless and force policymakers to come up with solutions to seemingly intractable problems.  In this seminar, we'll read and dissect the works of journalists who've written stories about complex social problems and have done so using many of the conventions employed by writers of fiction.  Writer Ben Yagoda described this literary journalism as "making facts dance."  We'll spend our time researching numerous social issues and learn to write about them in a clear and compelling voice. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 255	Hinduism	3 Units	This course will provide an introduction to Hindu thought and culture. We will read a wide range of texts and secondary sources. Two readings, the Ramayana and Samskara, will focus on issues of ethics and proper dharma. We will also be watching Deepa Mehta's Fire. There will be a visit to the Shiva-Vishnu Temple in Parma. Heavy emphasis on research and writing. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 266	Framing Our Legal System: Law in the Movies	3 Units	This course explores important themes in the study of law, lawyers, and legal institutions by regarding their representations in movies. We will cover such issues as race/class/gender and the law, legal ethics, legal education, the adversarial system, and the image and status of the lawyer in American culture. We will also look at the ways in which law and the legal profession affect popular culture and, conversely, the ways in which poplar views of legal problems and lawyers affect law. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 271	Schoolhouse Rocked: Education Reform	3 Units	Today, the term "education reform" may bring to mind standardized tests and No Child Left Behind. Many believe that our schools must become more rigorous, with stricter rules and definable goals. "Reform," however, used to be defined differently. John Dewey, Maria Montessori, and Paulo-Freire, for example, struggled to make schools freer and more humane. They hoped not to make the classroom less challenging, but more child-centered. Some disciples of such reformers, discouraged by schools' resistance to change, eventually turned to homeschooling--pulling kids out of school and educating them with real-life learning experiences. In this seminar, we will explore progressive educational theory and connect it with contemporary alternative schools and homeschooling. Visits to nearby Montessori and Waldorf schools and discussions with homeschoolers will make real-life connections to seminar reading and classwork. Challenging assumptions about how well our schools work and raising questions such as, "How do we learn?" and "What is good teaching?" will provoke thought, conversation, and interesting writing. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 275	Psychology of Creativity	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to explore how individuals become creative.  What are the most important qualities, emotional and cognitive, that are related to creativity?  Is there a creative personality?  What is the difference between artistic and scientific creativity?  How does creativity relate to mental illness?  How can we foster creativity in people? The course will study creativity in children and adults and will include research studies as well as descriptions of creativity from creative individuals.  We will also discuss how different cultures view and effect creativity and the ethical issues involved.  This course is a seminar and will use a discussion format. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 285I	Spectacle in American Culture	3 Units	This seminar will examine the topic of spectacle both chronologically and typologically to better u understand the power of remarkable visual experiences to awe, entertain, persuade, and create meaning from the colonial period to the present day.  In the 17th century, the religious beliefs of the New England community and its need to maintain social cohesiveness gave rise to the spectacle of witch trials and public punishments. As Americans moved westward, the natural world became the focus of the spectacular.  In the nineteenth century, the campaigns and debates of presidential candidates became political theater.  The latter half of the century gave rise to Consumption as Spectacle as exemplified in the may expositions and World's Fairs.  Today, spectacle has reached all facets of our lives.  Americans are willing to expose the most intimate details of their personal relationships on television shows like Jerry Springer and The Real World.  Although frequently used to maintain power, spectacle also has been employed as a tactic of resistance and as an instrument for creating alternative meaning by subcultures. More recently, spectacle has served as an instrument of terror. Through lectures, discussion, multimedia presentations, and writing assignments, we will have an opportunity to reflect on the many forms and uses of spectacle in American history. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 285L	Hollywood Cartoons, American Society	3 Units	This class provides a history of mainstream animation produced in the United States during the 20th century, emphasizing in particular the output of the Hollywood animation studios of the 1930s-1950s, the shift to television animation in the 1950s, and the rebirth of animation in the 1980s. In addition to the general history of the field and key periods of creative development in the genre, we will discuss various sub-genres or narrative fads within animation, cultural and social movements of the 20th century and how they are reflected in contemporaneous popular culture, issues of art versus commerce in the creation of popular animation, the intersection of animation and politics, and the representation of race, gender, sexuality and religion. Since this class focuses on visual media, we will also spend a great deal of time both watching films and discussing how to watch animated films with a critical eye. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 285N	Globalization and American Culture	3 Units	This course investigates the role of the United States in globalization. The first third examines the claim that globalization entrails cultural "Americanization," the middle third covers the resistance of local cultures, and the last part explores the ways in which American invented technologies do, in fact, spread culturally specific ways of working and behavior. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 285T	Why We Believe Weird Things	3 Units	How, in such a skeptical age, can people maintain questionable beliefs regarding urban legends, alternative medicine, superstitions, and paranormal phenomena?  How do cults manage to attract and maintain large memberships?  How can so many seemingly normal people come to the conclusion that they have been abducted by aliens?  We will explore the idea that these behaviors are not examples of pathological thought processes, but rather natural consequences of the biases that characterize everyday reasoning.  Emphasis will be placed on critical examination of questionable phenomena with a goal of understanding why people might want to hold such beliefs. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 286E	Global Tourism	3 Units	Tourism can be viewed as a metaphor for contemporary existence in an increasingly globalizing world where attachments and ties to a concrete place are often temporary.  Besides capturing the essence of present-day mobility, tourism is a phenomenon that can be researched both politically and economically.  Indeed, 10 percent of global GNP comes from tourism and many poor countries rely on the tourism industry to sustain national economic development.  In this class, we will touch on the economic and political significance of tourism, but will spend most of our time thinking of what happens in the tourist encounter, what tourists expect, what drives them, and who loses as well as benefits in the encounter.  Some of the specific themes include: the nature of tourist destinations, quest for authentic sites, entertainment tourism (Disneyland, Dracula-Park), tourism to Auschwitz, culinary tourism, sex tourism, and eco-tourism.  By reading theoretical works, travel blogs, and literature, we will gain insight to the motivations of tourists, the inhabitants of the places being visited, and international organizations as well as governments who oversee this industry. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 286L	Exploring Non-Profit Organizations	3 Units	This seminar is structured to expose students to the opportunities and challenges of working in and running non-profit organizations.  Students will explore the importance and significant roles non-profit organizations play in our society.  The class will learn how non-profits are organized and regulated and the importance of the organization's mission is to determining the impact of the non-profit organization in the community.  Additionally, the students will learn how non-profits are funded and how these organizations maintain their financial stability and sustainability in the community.  These goals will be accomplished through group analysis of non-profit organizational principles, and investigation of existing non-profit organizations. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 286V	Management of Chronic Illness in a Cultural Context	3 Units	This course will explore the cross cultural, self-care approaches to health problems.  It covers substance-based (e.g., herbs, acupuncture), mind-body (e.g., yoga, qigong), spiritual (e.g., prayer) and social (e.g., communal, family) approaches that have been used to manage chronic diseases and promote wellness in various cultural settings. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 286X	The Future of News	3 Units	The saying goes, "Strong Press, Strong Democracy."  But what of strong democracy in the Internet Age when the traditional press seems weak?  That's this seminar's big question.  Can the "old" media, struggling to avoid financial collapse, still deliver the news necessary to be democracy's watchdog, as in the past?  Can the new internet media--blogs, YouTube, viral videos, "hyperlocalism" experiments, pro publica investigations, crowd sourcing, instant news, Facebook, Gawker, True/Slant, Drudge and the proliferation of the other news and entertainment sources--take its place or complement traditional journalism?  How do these new entrants change the nature of news and the role of the media in our society?  These are uncharted developments, but they go to the heart of the continued success of America's democratic experiment.  Our goal is to grasp more clearly the connections between media, news, citizenship and democracy in this new age. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 287E	Clash of the Titans: Economic, Industrial and Social Trends for the 21st Century	3 Units	Since the beginning of recorded human civilization, locally dominant societies have risen, prospered, decayed and finally ended, with new ones taking their place.  Starting in the 15th century, however, Europe established global dominance and maintained it for four centuries, from the age of New World exploration through the Industrial Revolution of the 19th century.  Then came the rise of the United States, which in the late 20th century became the world's only superpower, economically, industrially, militarily and, increasingly, culturally.    In the late 20th and early 21st centuries, we are witnessing the "flattening" of the world due to the technological revolution, a phenomenon brought about by the instant and worldwide generation of and access to information.  Two major consequences of this evolution are: a) Individuals are more empowered than at any time in history and the traditional societal structure is under constant challenge; b) Companies have changed their business structures and practices and have begun to operate on a truly global scale.  The main goal of the course is to help students learn the lessons of history and use them to develop an educated argument as to whether the US will continue in its prominent leadership role, or whether one or both of the emerging Asian economic powerhouses, China and India, will supplant it and become dominant. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 287H	Vocation and Life	3 Units	What is your life for?  Should it be for anything?  The idea of a vocation originally meant a calling to a higher purpose, however that may be conceived.  Over time, the idea of a vocation flattened out and became another word for a job.  Yet living for a job hardly seems like living.  One advantage of the older meaning of the word was to highlight this fact:  the question of life is how to live life.  In this course, we explore the concept of a vocation--both as a calling and as a job--and we use the seminar format and its exercises to provide ourselves with the opportunity to focus our lives on what we are living for, or, at the least, why we do not think we need to do anything beyond just living well.  But what is it to live well?  What is the point of all our work? Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 287P	Technology and Social Change	3 Units	This class examines the reciprocal relationship between material culture (technology) and non-material culture (society and social structure) as they produce social change.  The class is organized by major areas in the development of technology as well as chronologically in terms of major epochs of technological and societal development. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 287T	Gender, Visibility and Performance: The Courtesan	3 Units	Throughout history, the figure of the courtesan has embodied seduction, performance, and mystery; occupying the private spaces of the real and the imaginary across cultures.  The impact of the courtesan on society can be seen in travelogues, poetry, and historical treatises, as well as in texts written specifically about courtesans themselves.  Those cultures which had a courtesan class frequently experienced varying degrees of social discomfort.  Within the culture, there was tension between those who patronized courtesans and those who considered them a social menace.  From without, cultures which had courtesans were believed to be either excessively decadent or highly civilized, depending on the cultural standpoint of the observer.   In this seminar, we will study real courtesans as well as examine the figure of the courtesan within the context of literature, religion, music history, and gender theory.  The seminar will begin with an overview of the origins of the courtesan, focused on the roles of women and slave musicians in the court and temple in Egypt, India, Greece, and Mesopotamia starting in 3,000 BCE.  Then, we will explore factors leading to the development of a courtesan class and compare the roles of courtesans and their place in their culture in Europe, India, Asia, and the Middle East.  Readings and class discussion will encompass issues relating to the impact of gender on performance, literary genres, education, and social and legal status, as well as continuing questions related to translation of primary sources, colonialism, and religious movements.  In addition to the readings, we will also study images of the courtesan from antiquity to the present, listen to music by and about courtesans, sample some of their writing, and watch films about "real" courtesans.  The primary goal is not only to look at the impact of courtesans in history, but also to engage issues related to gender and performance from a variety of different disciplinary and cultural points of view. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 287V	The Public and the Past: History in the Marketplace	3 Units	How does one or should one "sell" the past? Our primary encounters with the past are not in the university classroom, but via popular media, museums, theme parks, and historic sites; entities whose survival is increasingly dependent upon market economics. This dependency often demands attention to audience size and the need to avoid controversies that could alienate private and public funders. Complicating this is the issue of heritage--the somewhat mythic pasts which individuals, groups, and nations claim as their right, even when research challenges the underlying myths. What then are the consequences, in terms of ethics and accuracy, or in terms of civic value, when one turns history into a heritage-based commodity? More specifically, how does this affect professional historians? Can they work in history outside of academe without sacrificing integrity and standards? The seminar will debate these critical questions and also take an in-depth look at the growing field (positions, products and potential) of public/applied history. Readings, documentaries, interviews, and on-site visits to public history institutions will provide the basis for our discussions and the written assignments in this seminar as well as serve as an introductory "course" for students interested in a career in public or applied history. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 287Z	Concubines, Soldiers and Field Hands: World Slavery from Antiquity to the Present	3 Units	For many Americans, the most familiar type of slavery is plantation slavery of the Americas and the horrific consequences to the indigenous peoples and transplanted peoples from Africa. The longevity of the institution of slavery, and acceptance of the practice by many different cultures and belief systems, however, reaches from antiquity to the present day. In addition to providing physical labor and domestic services, slaves have been used as entertainers, civil servants, led armies and served in temples. Slavery is a complex legal, religious, moral and social institution, and the relationship between slave, state and owner/slaver is equally complicated; so much so that understanding the bond between them, and what the actual boundary was between "free" and "un-free", is still difficult to determine in some cultures. In this seminar, we will use a chronological framework to examine the institution of slavery, uses for slaves, methodologies and sources for studying slavery and the slave trade in world history. Beginning with slavery in the Ancient Near East, Egypt, Greece and Rome, the class will include slavery and the feudal system in medieval Europe, indentured servitude and concubinage, slaves in the early Islamic courts, the Ottoman slave trade, the African slave trade and slavery in the Americas, and the current problem of human trafficking. Within each section, students will read primary texts and recent scholarship examining the social, economic and religious rationales behind slavery. We will also study different methodologies and the impact of gender, race and social class on the study of world slavery. As many slaver cultures had different definitions for what it meant to be a slave, we will address questions related to translation, interpretation and perception when dealing with primary sources. The primary goal of the course is to provide a broader context for the institution of slavery in world history as a means not only to understand the impact of slavery has had on American culture, but on other cultures as well. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 288B	Doing Good: How Nonprofits Change Lives	3 Units	The American economy is made up of three sectors: government, business, and nonprofit. It's pretty obvious what government and business do, but the activity of nonprofits, while it is everywhere, is much more subtle. A nonprofit is most likely where you were born, went to school, attend church, or adopted your family dog. If you became an Eagle Scout, watched "Sesame Street," attended a benefit concert, or participated in a walk for a cause, you were engaged with a nonprofit. Perhaps you haven't given much thought to the way the organization was structured, where it gets its money, or what kind of an impact it's really having. In this seminar, students will learn what nonprofits are, how they operate, how they influence everyday lives, and their role in advancing social change and a civil society. We will consider the economic impact of nonprofits as well as their role in protecting culture, environment, values, and heritage. We will also look at the key challenges facing nonprofits today and how they are addressing them. Writing assignments will include a grant proposal for a new or existing nonprofit. The seminar will feature guest speakers and class visits to nonprofits in the Cleveland area. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 288C	Green Transformation and Globalization	3 Units	This seminar introduces students to the recent major green transformation in China and elsewhere in the world, focusing on the way the green changes took place in relation to globalization, environment and climate protection, technology innovation, income redistribution, domestic consumption, and education, to meet the challenges of financial crisis, climate change, energy insecurity, and international competition. The seminar will also assess the impacts of various aspects of green transformation and globalization on today's and future world and vice versa.  This seminar promotes broad knowledge of-and increased appreciation of the importance of diversity in China's cultural past, social frameworks, economic conditions, and natural environment. In a close connection to the primary readings, which include several recent relevant works, the students will be exposed to a variety of related primary and secondary materials (such as texts, photos, film clips, music, songs, and websites). In addition to receiving informative yet concise instruction, the student will also be involved in practice in critical reading and thinking, in writing and orally presenting research papers. In these activities, the students will be introduced to basic methods and concepts critical to the understanding of important economic, social, and cultural developments and changes as products of movements rather than isolated incidents. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 288E	Early Childhood Music	3 Units	This course develops critical thinking, writing, and discussion skills through guided inquiry on the subject of music in early childhood.  Researchers in the areas of child development, linguistics, sociology, psychology, and music education have documented children's musical development and noted the interplay of musical development with many other spheres of child development and interaction. What is the role of music in a child's holistic development? Could enriching musical experiences provide needed interventions to children considered "at-risk?"  What is the "First 2000 Days" movement and how does music enter the equation? What types of music therapy are available for young children in medical, educational, and social settings, and what impact have we seen in these areas? In this course, students will explore these questions through reading, research, guest lectures, and observations of young children. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 288T	Coffee and Civilization	3 Units	Whether you enjoy an occasional cup or sip throughout the day from a bottomless mug, did you know that since its introduction in the Western world coffee has been intimately tied to sociability and intellectual life? In this seminar, we will explore coffee's civilizing history, from eighteenth-century coffee houses buzzing with political dissent, to 1920s establishments crowded with avant-garde artists and our modern bookstore cafés. We will also explore the human and ecological costs of our taste for coffee by investigating the enduring connections between coffee, slavery, North-South geo-political relations, and notions of fair trade. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 288Y	The Secret History of Corporate America	3 Units	The corporation is the most powerful economic institution of our time. How did it come to reign, and how does its power affect us economically, politically, and socially? This course will chart the history and impact of corporate capitalism. Topics will include the corporation's impact on democracy, consumer culture, the environment, and even the university itself. If you have ever wondered why products are purposely designed to wear out (planned obsolescence), why unions are so powerless in America, why the military is as powerful as it is, why it takes special technology from the Diebold corporation to run a simple election, why broadcasting companies are allowed to profit by using the public airwaves for free, why it looks like there are a million publishers of books when in truth giant companies dominate 80 percent of the book market, why the perfect lawn is a marketing ploy to get consumers to buy a lot of chemical inputs, why universities, which are supposed to be bastions of independent thought, are now dominated by an army of administrators who run around talking about return on investment instead of figuring out how to create a culture where students can learn, then this is the course for you. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 289C	Ethics For The Real World: Developing a Code of Ethics to Guide Decisions in Work and Life	3 Units	This seminar addresses two major questions: How do the contexts in which we live or work affect ethical behavior?  And how can we manage to struggle through personal and organizational challenges if we find they present us with something ethically compromising?  In this course, we look to religion, spiritual teaching and cultural upbringing to understand sources of personal values and standards of behavior that might help structure one's life in the midst of difficult contexts.  One way we consider this is through practical exercises including development of your own personal code of ethics, an iterative process designed to help you articulate the principles of your own moral construction.  These can serve as a foundation for leadership integrity and moral courage for ethical decisions throughout life and work. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 289H	The Meaning of Difference: Constructions of Diversity in American Culture	3 Units	Diversity means different things to different people in the United States and around the world.  In the United States, in particular, the meaning of difference is connected to categories of identity, meaning and ideas.  In this course, we will focus on discovering and understanding various categories of difference, the ways they are constructed, and by whom.  We will look at how language and power operate in culture and how the interactions of language and power affect all of us.  We will explore constructions of difference in American culture according to race, ethnicity, sex and gender, social class, sexual orientation/expression, disability, and religion.  When we read American culture as a text, what do we see and hear about diversity? How do we make meaning of what we see and hear about diversity? What have scholars/thought leaders/writers written about the topic? How have these definitions of diversity affected your own life? How does diversity shape the stories we tell about ourselves, others, American culture and the culture of other nations? Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 289J	Treasure or Trash: Examining Theatrical Credibility	3 Units	This seminar is a fundamental study of theatre from the standpoint of developing the critical acumen of a potential audience.  It covers each ingredient of the theatrical experience-audience, playwriting, acting, directing, theatre architecture, design and technology-and attempts to help students define a reasonable set of standards to judge that part of the experience as an audience member and to clearly communicate their feelings and thoughts regarding that experience. In addition to class discussions, lectures, and readings, students are also required to attend four live performances-two theater productions offered by Case Western Reserve University's Department of Theater and two productions at the Cleveland Play House.  The students will write critical essays about their experience as an audience member in relation to a particular aspect of the performance. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 289K	Riots and Rituals: Struggles for Justice in a Globalizing World	3 Units	This course asks students to explore two broad questions: How might we understand contemporary globalization? And, how do those people marginalized by globalization seek justice? Globalization and social justice have now become household terms. However, today, perhaps more than ever, we must ask precisely what type of globalization we are experiencing and what type of globalization we want for our future. If we are seeking the best possible global future for everyone, then it is crucial that we understand how those left behind by globalization struggle to get their interests heard. This course takes a unique approach to these problems by working with two extended case studies. We start with Cleveland, Ohio in the 1960s, and the beginnings of economic globalization in the United States. Cleveland's Hough riots of 1966 were one of the most violent political events in the city's history. We then move to contemporary Madagascar, where global rainforest conservation programs pose a real threat to the cultures of indigenous groups and their rights to land. Here, ritual has become a powerful means by which Malagasy groups assert their interests. With both case studies, important questions arise for classroom consideration: What is the exact nature of the globalization processes at work in both places? What can we learn about the development of globalization between the 1960s and now? Who are the groups most harmed by these processes? And, what can riots and rituals teach us about how groups marginalized by globalization struggle to have their claims for justice heard? The instructor has carried-out long term research in both Cleveland and Madagascar, and will take an interdisciplinary approach to theories of globalization and justice throughout the course. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 289L	The Roots of the Arab-Israeli Conflict	3 Units	This reading- and discussion-based seminar delves into one of the most complicated issues in our world. To begin to understand it takes careful reading and reflection, skills on which this course focuses. It also takes untangling the underlying issues from the trauma, dogma, and violence surrounding them. Seminar participants will learn how the roots of the conflict lie in the Ottoman and British Empires.  Course materials include histories of Zionism, pre-Zionist Palestine, the British Mandate years, the British Empire in other Arab lands, and the 1948 war and aftermath. Primary sources from the perspective British officials on the ground in Palestine receive much attention. The histories of engineering and agriculture are highlighted alongside traditional social and political perspectives.  Students may not get credit for this course if they have taken HSTY 339. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 289M	The Detective Novel	3 Units	Who dunnit?  Why do we keep asking this question?  You dunnit.   Readers have an investment in finding answers to puzzles and to threatening narrative situations. In this course on one of the world's most popular literary genres, you will not only learn of its origins, but about theories of why you keep reading these stories.   The texts begin with the Memoirs of Eugene-Francois Vidocq and stories of Edgar Allan Poe, and run though contemporary novelists such as Sara Paretsky and Natsuo Kirino.  Why is this genre appeal so popular in so many cultures? There will be a strong comparativist slant to the course; students will be encouraged to explore the cultural context of Natsuo Kirino's and Stieg Larsson's novels which, like many of the classics, provide fertile ground for comparison to film adaptations. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 289P	Polar Regions in History	3 Units	This course will explore the effect the polar regions have had on the strategic ambitions, pursuit of wealth, scientific investigations, and heroic imagination of (mainly Western) individuals, nations, and cultures, focusing on the modern and early modern periods (c. 1500-present).  It will also familiarize students with the physical geography and ecology of the north and south polar regions, the ways in which Arctic-adapted peoples have responded to the challenges of their environment, and the impact that contact with outsiders has had on these environments and peoples.  Students will read books and view videos that recount the personal experiences of polar explorers and others involved in international competition for exploratory "firsts," describe the efforts nations have made to claim polar resources, and examine debates about climate change. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 289V	To Everest and Back	The Politics and Culture of Mountaineering	3 Units	In April 2014, at the start of the climbing season, 16 Sherpas working for commercial operators died in an avalanche on Mount Everest. This event precipitated an unprecedented crisis: after tense negotiations with their Western employers and clients, the Sherpas brought the spring climbing season to an abrupt close. Although this action seemed sudden, it had been a long time coming. Conditions on the mountain had by all accounts been deteriorating for decades: ugly trash heaps, tensions caused by economic disparities between Western guides and their indigenous counterparts, and ever more demanding--yet often under-prepared--Western clients indicated that what had once been the site of adventure and achievement had devolved into crass commercialism and exploitation. What is Everest for anyway? To whom does it belong? This course will chart the history of the "conquest" of Everest. We will ask the following questions: What prompted Westerners to venture into landscapes that their ancestors had previously shunned? When and how did the West's aesthetic appreciation of high mountains begin? When did this appreciation morph into a competitive drive to scale ever higher peaks in far-away lands? How does this history overlap with that of colonialism? Is mountaineering an ethical endeavor? Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 289Y	The Symphony Orchestra and its Place in Contemporary Culture	3 Units	In measuring the cultural profile of a metropolitan area, the presence of a successful symphony orchestra is often used as a model to determine cultural sophistication and refinement. In recent years, however, the model of the orchestra has encountered significant challenges. Using the world-renowned Cleveland Orchestra as a paradigm, this seminar will examine the orchestra in contemporary culture and attempt to answer the questions: what will the symphony orchestra be in the near future and what must it become to sustain its cultural importance?  In this course, we will focus our seminar-style discussions, formal presentations, and research-based writing on the following six topics: defining evolving cultural norms and the place of the orchestra in today's culture as compared to previous eras; describing the orchestra audience of the future based on social and cultural trends; defining the ideal balance of orchestral repertoire for tomorrow's listeners; discovering how technology has affected the institution of the orchestra, including performances, recordings, marketing, and communications; examining the financial challenges and bankruptcies of orchestras in recent years and analyzing their causes; and analyzing changes in fund-raising techniques and searching for ideal future models. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 289Z	China and the World: 19th and 20th Century Encounters	3 Units	Although frequently characterized as a country with a past that was marked by insularity and disdain for all things foreign, until the West "opened [it] up," China's engagement with the world has been long and deep. China--Chinese emperors, Chinese governments, and Chinese people across the social spectrum--have energetically engaged with the broader world, permitting, encouraging, and seeking the circulation of foreign ideas and goods.   This course is about how China has taken measure of the world and the goods and ideas that have flowed into and out of China during the past several centuries, from roughly the sixteenth through the twentieth centuries. Students will examine one topic in depth as an historical case study during the semester-long course. Possible topics from which the case study will be drawn include the Opium Wars, meanings of revolution, gender and sexuality, religion and political ideology, the environment, nationalism, history of science and technology, etc. Focus on a single thematic topic serves as a microcosm of social, political, and economic exchanges that highlight the complex ways in which understandings of China and the world have shifted over time. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 290B	Contemporary American Rhetoric	3 Units	The health of a democratic society depends on an informed electorate. And yet the attack ads, unverified accusations, sound-bites, and carefully scripted and staged media events that fill television and the Internet tend to misinform, confuse, and disengage voters. How might we reverse this trend? How can we meaningfully enter into political conversations? How can we listen to others, form our own beliefs, and then communicate them respectfully and with purpose? To help answer these questions, we will return to modern democracy's ancient roots, using the lens of classical rhetoric to explore contemporary political debate. While the word "rhetoric" is often used today to deride precisely what's wrong with political discourse, as when a policy proposal is dismissed as mere "campaign rhetoric," it more properly denotes the techniques of effective persuasion. By learning how rhetorical devices are used, we can empower ourselves to analyze policy debates and to make our own contributions. As part of this investigation, we will research issues, debate and develop positions, read and evaluate speeches, write about our own positions, participate in public conversations by writing letters to representatives and opinion pieces for newspapers, and prepare an oral presentation. We will also complete a research project in which we analyze the different perspectives on an issue of interest, formulate our own positions on an issue, and reflect on our internal processes as we take on a belief and act on it. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 290G	A History of Workers in the US	3 Units	This course examines the lives of the ethnically and racially diverse women and men, skilled and unskilled, and rural and urban laborers that produce the goods and provide the services that society consumes.  At crucial moments, working people have joined social movements in an effort to improve some aspect of their lives.  We therefore will assess workers in relation to several known and less known American social movements, such as the eight-hour day movement during the late nineteenth century, the peace movement during WWI, and the Civil Rights movement in the wake of WWII.  As we study these social movements through the lens of labor history, we will focus on making sense of periods of conflict and cooperation between European American, African American, and Mexican American workers.  Throughout the course we will also discuss the politics of time-managed work, the role of unions within a competitive market economy, the influence of public policy and government institutions, and the relationship between industrial economies and blue-collar communities. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 290J	Touch Throughout the Life Span	3 Units	This seminar will consider a variety of topics related to touch throughout the life span. Opportunities are provided to learn from colleagues and resources available to the public about the structure, functions, uses, misuses, and health considerations of touch from birth to old age. Touch as it is conveyed through different venues and with different purposes will be explored; touch for development, touch for socialization, therapeutic animal touch and what are pets need, touch as punishment, touch in the workplace, touch and technology, intimate touch, abusive touch, necessity of touch, healing touch, and comforting and noxious touch. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 290L	The Big Story of Small Things	3 Units	"The big story of small things" looks at ordinary people, prosaic objects, mundane places, single incidents and fleeting moments, and the ways we might interpret micro cases to make sense of macro developments in our world. Spanning the Middle Ages to the present and crisscrossing several continents, this USEM also ranges among history, anthropology and literature. Topics may include a flower, an orphan abduction, a cockfight, a flood, a peasant, a pencil, a miracle, a midwife, a murder, an unfinished stocking and a year. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 290M	The Effects of Race, Class and Education: A Dialogue on Current Issues	3 Units	Recent decades have seen a growing income and opportunity disparity in America.  In our seminar, we will examine a variety of overlapping issues related to this crisis, with special attention to the impact of race, class and educational levels in determining how people fare in society.  The larger set of issues includes poverty, income inequality, job loss and its effect on the industrial city, the concept of a "living wage," affordable housing, education, and sentencing and incarceration.  Readings, class discussions, and student papers will all explore these topics. In urban communities such as Cleveland and Northeast Ohio, the income and opportunity divide is especially visible and persistent.  Recognizing this, we have incorporated a novel approach to experiential learning in our seminar.  Case Western Reserve students will interact with a similarly sized group of students incarcerated at a nearby state prison.  The two groups will conduct workshops together and will hold joint discussions via teleconference throughout the semester.  The incarcerated students will be studying the same material on the same schedule and will be sharing their views with students in the seminar.   We believe there are several benefits to this dialogue.  We have two Northeast Ohio institutions--our university and the prison--which are neighbors but whose residents are largely from opposite sides of the divide.  It will be useful to consider the income and opportunity divide from both perspectives and to share ideas and experiences related to the overall problem of inequality.  A bilateral discussion and interaction will not only enhance the students' educational experience, but also, we hope, will foster greater understanding.   Procedures will be in place to ensure strict confidentiality and anonymity in any and all exchanges of views between CWRU students and students at the prison. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 290N	Perspectives on Dying and Death: Normalizing the Inevitable	3 Units	The inevitability of death encompasses us all. We are all born with the disease of mortality.  We all die. And yet, to many of us the details of dying and death are a mystery. It is an abstraction we would rather not think about. This course aims to create thoughtful and reflective dialogue about dying and death, confronting death as something more than an abstract possibility. We will review the physical, psychological, social, spiritual, cultural, ethical, and economic perspectives of dying in America. Reflective thinking will be carefully guided by an array of faculty and guest speakers, both those who are directly involved in the care of the dying and those who provide services to families of the deceased. We are likely to visit a funeral home, a cemetery, and/or a hospice house to explore opportunities to reflect on our own views of dying and death and to consider others' cultural beliefs and traditions. Finally, we will discuss the concept of quality of life and examine current evidence related to dying and death in America, such as the 2015 Institute of Medicine Report, Dying in America: Improving Quality and Honoring Individual Preferences Near the End of Life. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 290Q	Crime, Society, and Culture in Early America	3 Units	Since the late seventeenth century, American readers have been endlessly fascinated by the subjects of crime and punishment--and especially by murders and other heinous offenses committed in their own communities.  Much as Americans today "consume" crime through movies, television shows, newspapers, magazines, mystery novels, "true crime" books, websites, and popular music, so also did Americans of the 1670s through 1850s "consume" crime through a variety of popular genres, including execution sermons, criminal (auto)biographies, trial reports, and murder ballads.  Since most convicted criminals in early America came from nonelite backgrounds (and often belonged to oppressed or otherwise subordinated social groups), such publications not only shed light on crime, punishment, the legal system, normative social values, power relations, and popular culture, but also provided historians with some of their most valuable sources on the day-to-day experiences of ordinary men and women.  This seminar explores all of these topics.  Each week, students will read topically-related clusters of early crime publications, usually in conjunction with relevant modern scholarship drawn from the fields of social history, legal history, psychology, criminology, and literary studies.  The types of crimes explored include witchcraft, piracy, burglary, robbery, and various types of homicide, such as infanticide, familicide (cases of men murdering their wives and children), and sexual homicide (or courtship murder). Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 290S	Cultural Ecology and Sustainability: An Anthropological Approach	3 Units	In the modern period, we have witnessed spectacular scientific and technological achievements.  We have also experienced devastating climate change and massive biodiversity loss that threaten life on Earth as we know it. Is it possible that the solutions to these problems are not scientific or technological, but rather cultural? How have other cultures, whether from the present or the past, dealt with sustainability challenges? How might an examination of indigenous or traditional cultures, some of which have existed sustainably for thousands of years and even enhanced the biodiversity of their environments, lead to a clearer understanding of the deleterious attitudes and actions of our own modern culture? How can we integrate the wisdom of these cultures to ensure the survival of our own? In this seminar, we will use these questions to enhance our understanding of the relationship between human culture and the natural world, as well as the ways in which a deeper understanding of cultural ecology can promote sustainability. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 290T	Making: Innovation, Work, and Competition	3 Units	Manufacturing has been an important source of economic growth and innovation. In many countries, it has helped create a middle class by providing both well-paying jobs and cheap goods. In recent decades, however, manufacturing has declined in the US.  Should we be concerned about this trend? Does off-shoring of production to places like China threaten or enhance the US standard of living or technological strength? Do efforts to protect manufacturing in the US hurt people in developing countries? How will the development of "maker spaces" (such as CWRU's ThinkBox) affect the way goods are produced? How does high-wage Germany run a trade surplus in manufacturing? Does environmental regulation help or hurt manufacturing?   In this seminar, we will address these questions both practically and theoretically. In addition to reading engineering, historical and literary depictions of manufacturing, we will visit factories and speak with leaders from industry, labor, and government. We will also consider broader economic policy questions by reading the works of prominent economists and political scientists. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 290U	Power and Fashion: Dress and Politics in American History	3 Units	As clothing is one of the most accessible means through which we express our identities, political and social tensions are often embedded and embodied in dress. As an expressive medium, clothing and appearance became crucial in the construction of political identities and in serving as a means of control, oppression, as well as protest and resistance. This seminar will examine the links between clothing, sartorial practices and political significance. Readings will address the question of sartorial politics from a historical perspective. Special attention will be given to the role of clothes in negotiating and constructing gender, race, class, sexual, and national identities from the 18th century to the present.  Students may not earn credit for both this course and HSTY 126. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 290V	Education and Inequality in America	3 Units	Guided by the aspiration to provide equal opportunity to all and initiatives like No Child Left Behind, the US educational system has defined itself as a free and open system that rewards accomplishment and nourishes every student¹s potential. It is based on a philosophy that stands in stark contrast to the foreclosed and explicitly stratified educational systems of many European countries. Why then is it the case that, compared to other advanced postindustrial societies, the US has extraordinary levels of inequality? This course will examine in detail the processes that regulate social inequality and the educational system. We will analyze how differences between students¹ social, cultural, and economic capital create a stratified educational experience that shapes not only how students are educated, but also the value of that education in the labor market. We will also trace how the inequalities that exist in the US education system from primary school through college play an important role in the reproduction of class inequality, challenging the myth that education is a vehicle for socioeconomic mobility. This course also explores how these inequalities in education run along the axes of race, class, and gender. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 290W	Understanding Body Image through Self-Perception	3 Units	This course examines the historical, psychological, and cultural approaches to the self-perception of one's own body. We will explore how body standards have changed throughout history and across cultures, and how this is reflected in portraiture. Additionally, we will investigate psychological studies on body image, acknowledging the challenges in an evidence-based approach and considering medical diagnoses when distortion in self-perception occurs. Finally, we will analyze current body standards perpetuated by the media in regards to body size, shape, and gender. Through reading and discussion, students will gain a deeper understanding of healthy body image and strategies for applying it to their own lives. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 290Y	Shrinking the World: Ham Radio and Distance Communication	3 Units	Radio operators can talk to each other across the world, launch and use space satellite stations, and bounce their voices off the moon. And yet the Federal Communications Commission still regulates what they may say on the air. Why is that? And why does amateur radio require a license? In this course, we'll discuss the history of long-distance communication methods stretching from the British Penny Post into the modern digital age, viewed particularly through the lens of the Amateur Radio Service. We will also explore the ways that advances in communication technology have changed politics, entertainment and personal interactions. Who makes the rules for a new system of communication? What causes changes in those rules? Was Orson Welles morally, ethically, or legally responsible for causing a mass panic with his reading of "War of the Worlds?" What might the future hold for communications? Students will earn amateur radio licenses, make contacts with other radio amateurs around the world and with each other, and possibly bounce signals off the moon and listen for their return. We will also look at the ham radio culture, from QSL cards to public service and contesting. Students will learn some basic hands-on electronics, but no previous technical background is required. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 291E	Is College Worth It?	3 Units	Here you are at CWRU--you probably know how you got here.  But what do you expect out of the experience? University education evolved over time to meet certain social and economic needs, and different universities have differing missions of education. Are you curious about the history of higher education? Do you know how universities function?  What is the function of a tenured professorate, and is it an antiquated idea? Today, many people are questioning whether the educational models of the past have outlived their utility and need to be replaced by ones that are better aligned with our modern economy and technology. Does a liberal arts education prepare you for the workforce? Should it prepare you for the workforce?  By examining these questions, you will gain clearer insight into your own reasons for pursuing a college degree and how to get the most out of your experience. The decisions you make now affect what happens after you graduate.  How do you make the best decisions? This course will discuss these topics and students will submit additional topics about higher education for discussion and study. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 291J	Narratives of Immigration	3 Units	As one of the most pressing issues of the twenty-first century, immigration has captured the imagination of politicians and authors alike. In this class, we will explore the stories of those who have migrated to the United States. We will analyze how various writers create autobiographical and fictional narratives of migration, addressing issues such as adjusting to different cultures, learning new languages, and adapting to new environments. Through these stories and histories, we will ask broader questions about immigration, including: Is migration a basic human right? Is it ethical to define someone as being "illegal" for peacefully working and living in a different country from where they were born? What are the gender, ethnic, cultural, and racial barriers that exist when migrating between countries? What are the cost(s) of citizenship and embracing a new country as one's home? Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 291L	Our Food, Our Lives	Food, Agriculture, Society	3 Units	Where does our food come from? Who grows it? What technologies have enabled the emergence of our current food system? In this seminar, we will ask and ponder these and similar questions as we address the achievements, ills, and sustainability of our global food system. We will explore wide-spread concerns about the ecological consequences of industrial agriculture, its future opportunities, the livelihood of the world's farmers, food waste, and health issues caused by contemporary dietary habits. In our inquiry, we will focus on both neighborhood communities in Cleveland and various geopolitical entities including Latin America, Eastern Europe, and Southeast Asia to observe food corporations' power to control food choices. In the second part of our class, we will examine community organizations' efforts to give these choices back to the people. To this end, we will participate in various food-movement activities on or near campus and visit some local food-related organizations such as farmers markets, soup kitchens, and restaurants. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 291N	Literature of Nation-building in Francophone Africa	3 Units	This seminar explores the process of nation-building in former French African colonies by focusing on the impact of literature on the colonizers and the colonized. It is well established that writers in African colonies used their pens as cannons against a dehumanizing colonial system. Nor did they refrain from asking themselves what kind of nations would replace the colonial society once it had been overthrown. More precisely, their works questioned the kind of political, economic, educational, and cultural systems that could help shape the social structures and people that would inhabit these post-colonial nations. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 291O	Empathy, Identity, and the Moral Emotions	3 Units	We are often told to be true to ourselves. We are also told to care about others. There are times when it is difficult to do both at the same time. If being myself causes others pain, should I care? Is it possible that caring for others is an important piece of who I am? Or is it a threat to it? In such cases, our separate identities seem to challenge morality's insistence that we should not remain estranged from others or their concerns. Such challenges raise a question about the value of empathy--the ability to share the viewpoints and feelings of others. Empathy seems to explain why we care for one another, and this speaks to who we should be. Yet empathy also seems to be a threat to morality and identity, inasmuch as it might lead us to identify more with some persons than others, and so cause us to be less objective and fair. Likewise, identifying too strongly with others might undermine identity, as Stockholm syndrome and other pathologies of self-loss suggest. In this seminar, we will examine the concepts of identity, empathy, and morality through a variety of philosophical, historical, scientific, and literary texts in a collaborative attempt to understand who we are who we ought to be.  This will be a discussion-driven, writing-intensive course, ranging over religious, historical, philosophical, literary, and scientific literature, as well as music and film. Together we will examine these three concepts in all their historical, cultural, and trans-disciplinary diversity, in a collaborative attempt to understand and evaluate empathy's importance to matters of who we are and who we ought to be. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 291R	Aging Well	3 Units	People around the world are living longer. Researchers have examined human aging, and explored factors that contribute to the quality of life for older people. What does it mean for people to age well? Do current explanations about promoting survival, retaining physical and mental abilities, and maintaining family and social connnectedness fit people's experiences? In this seminar, students will consider current theoretical explanations regarding the physiological, psychological, sociological, cultural, and spiritual dimensions that contribute to aging well. Students will analyze programs and services available in the present day and dream about programs and services of the future that could support aging well. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 291U	Talking Bodies: An anthropological approach to tattoos, the body, & American culture	3 Units	Tattoos, once seen as disgraceful and lowbrow, are undergoing a renaissance. Undoubtedly you have seen a tattoo today; on you, your friends, your parents, someone on the street, or in the media. What explains this increased social acceptance of tattoos? Why are people motivated to get tattoos in the first place? What are they communicating about themselves? How, and why, do segments of American culture view tattoos differently? To answer these questions, we will use anthropology, the study of cultures around the people, as a lens to understand people's use of, and attitudes toward, tattoos in American culture. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 291X	"We're Dying in America": The History of the U.S. AIDS Crisis	3 Units	Thirty-seven years have passed since the summer of 1981, when the Centers for Disease Control published a report on the mysterious deaths of five previously-healthy gay men. In that time, more than thirty-nine million people have died of AIDS around the globe. Approximately 600,000 of those people died in the United States; at least 10,000 more Americans will die this year. Why, given the global scope of the crisis and the dramatic impact it has had on US society and culture, do so few students learn about the AIDS crisis in school? Why does it receive less attention than, for example, terrorism? In this course, we will study the first 20 years of the United States' AIDS crisis, and use what we learn to contemplate the current status of HIV-positive people and people with AIDS. We will examine the origins of AIDS as a biological, political, and cultural phenomenon in the hopes of understanding why the United States experienced the virus as it did. We will also address the myriad responses to the virus by presidents and preachers, artists and activists, doctors and business people. How did this tragedy impact American politics and culture? What lessons did we learn, and what mistakes are we still repeating today? How can (and should) the history of AIDS inform our response to the opioid crisis, or the battle over Obamacare? Are we ready for the next epidemic? Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 291Y	Immigration, Identity, and Writing	3 Units	For many in Europe and North America, globalization and immigration increasingly present a challenge to cultural identity. British Prime Minister Theresa May articulated this view when she stated in 2016, "If you believe you're a citizen of the world, you're a citizen of nowhere."  More than expressing misgivings about the consequence of globalization and immigration, May was asserting the importance of belonging to a place and a culture.  In contrast to May, the genre of writing known as global literature presents a framework for understanding our globalized world not as a cause for anxiety, but rather as an opportunity to understand how new cultural, social, and national identities take shape.  As the writer Adam Kirsch has observed, "individual lives are now lived and conceived under the sign of the whole globe."  One example of this more global view is Nigerian author Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie who, in We Should All Be Feminists, uses her experience of immigration to reconcile western feminism with the expectations of her native society.  As the popularity and influence of writers like Adichie attest, new voices and forms of writing possess global significance in our cosmopolitan and connected world.  Studying this literature reveals both connections and tensions between the local and the global.  These connections and tensions provide us with a fuller understanding of how people experience this globalized age and make sense of their place in the world. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 291Z	Queer Christianity	3 Units	We live in a historical moment when the relationship between queerness and Christianity is being reconsidered and hotly debated. To better understand this debate, as well as the differences and potential common ground between members of the queer and Christian communities (including those who belong to both!), this seminar examines the history of Christianity and its relationship to queerness. Is Christianity a force for domination or liberation? Orthodoxy or creative multiplicity? Normativity or queerness? To answer these questions, we will read literature that explores how Christianity has both suppressed and in some sense created queerness, as well as how it has been reclaimed by queer communities. We will also look closely at how these historical tensions are being played out locally today. Special attention also will be given to the range of intersecting identities and communities that have responded to the meeting of faith and sexuality in various ways, drawing from diverse contexts of race, ability/disability, gender, and class. Readings include selections from the Bible, books about theology, and documentaries and memoirs attesting to the experience of LGBT Christians. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 292A	What Makes People Happy	3 Units	What makes people happy? What prevents them from achieving happiness and maintaining it over time? Over the past 20 years, psychologists and cognitive scientists been studying these questions. Achieving happiness seems like a simple goal, and most people can readily name many things that make them happy, such as children, chocolate cake, and success at work or school. However, science shows that happiness is more complicated, as many of the things that people think make them happy also make them quite unhappy. Similarly, data suggests that many of the things that make people happy in the short run do not lead to long-term satisfaction with life. Whereas popular self-help books suggest a variety of ways to increase satisfaction with life, scientific researchers argue that our happiness is essentially predetermined by a genetic set-point. The interdisciplinary approach of this seminar will clarify some of this confusion by focusing on happiness from a variety of angles: the role of the brain in the perception of happiness, the effects happiness has on decision making, and the difference between short- and long-term approaches to boosting happiness.  Students will not get credit for this course if they previously earned credit for FSSY 157 Pursuits of Happiness. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 292E	Many Ways to Be a Woman: Intersectional Traditions of Feminism and Femininity	3 Units	Historically, "feminism" as a word has challenged people's political and personal investments in different ways as they encounter issues such as voting and jobs, marriage and divorce, racism and classism, homophobia and transphobia, healthcare and disability, personal liberties and social protections. Alongside these traditions of feminism, "femininity" has been a concept that seems simultaneously ancient while also under constant revision as women of color, post-colonialism, disability, queer, transgender and intersex thinkers introduce underrepresented perspectives. Facing these reactions and reforms, some people feel disinclined to identify with either word, adding to the list of "F-words" that can raise conflict in polite company. Yet however one feels about these F-words, feminism and femininity have regularly proven important movements in public debates around government, the work-force, education, and art. This seminar seeks to connect students with intersectional and sometimes conflicting traditions in politics and gender theory in order to broaden the horizons of who or what gets to be identified with feminism and femininity. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 292G	Creativity and Spirituality	3 Units	Humans have been developing the capacity to understand the supernatural forces that shape the universe and the meaning of our existence within it. This spiritual evolution is powered by humanity's integral primeval drive to be creative. We tend to look to the arts and sciences as a visible demonstration of creativity, but we all engage that creative instinct, consciously or unconsciously, in every facet of our lives. We draw on creativity whether we are dealing with everyday problems or significant transformative experiences. But what is creativity exactly? How does it work? Is creativity in the arts the same as creativity in the sciences? In this seminar, we will examine a variety of theories that attempt to explain creativity. We will also use research in the field of psychology and creativity studies to explore the relationship between an individual's creativity and their personality, experience, and environment, as well as whether creativity can be an acquired skill (and if so, how?). What role can creativity play in our work and play? What role does creativity play in our sense of selves as spiritual beings? We will investigate these questions using an integrated multi-dimensional methodology that combines theoretical and experiential approaches. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 292H	Religion and Human Rights	3 Units	This seminar examines the theories that underwrite human rights, as well as some contemporary human rights issues. We will begin by familiarizing ourselves with the history and theory of human rights. In doing so, we will examine how thinking about human rights is different from the way we think about legal and political rights. Then, we will use this historical and theoretical framework to examine the intersection between human rights issues--including gender rights, minority rights, and religious freedom--and religious belief and practice. We will use a variety of cases, from the place of racial and religious minorities in North American to gender and women's rights in India, to understand how these issues manifest themselves. How far do our historical and theoretical explorations help us understand and perhaps offer solutions to these vexing issues? Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 292K	The Corpse in America, 1865 to Today	3 Units	When are the dead not really dead? In the twenty-first century, a person's biological death activates a series of rituals to sanitize, memorialize, and dispose of their remains in a timely manner. Yet, American history is filled with exceptions to this rule. Using methodologies from history, anthropology, material culture, and visual culture studies, this course will address how the corpse continues to "live" as active material in American life. We will investigate how the corpse attains new meanings as a commercial object, a specimen, a relic, forensic evidence, or a museum display. We will explore how these shifting meanings are rooted in--but also help to construct--larger historical narratives about political conflict, economic disparity, and social inequality in the United States. The course topics allows us to locate continuities between the past and present, revealing that contemporary Americans are still wrestling with many of the same practical and moral questions about the appropriate place for the dead in our society. Our readings and visual materials, some of which are raw and graphic, will confront us with difficult questions about the value of the human body, the limits of bodily autonomy, and the consequences of social oppression and state violence in the United States. Together, these topics will challenge the existence of any single "American" way of death and will ask us to examine our own position as scholars, witnesses, and perpetrators of uncomfortable truths about the corpse in America. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 292N	Pyramids: The Building Blocks of Ancient Egypt	3 Units	One of the first images that springs to mind at the mention of Ancient Egypt is a pyramid. These iconic stone monuments have been studied by generations of astronomers, historians, archaeologists, physicists, architects and mathematicians (to name a few) and yet, they still remain enigmatic. Who built them? What were they for? What did they mean? Although people have tended to focus on the mystery of how Ancient Egyptians built the pyramids, the more interesting question to consider is how pyramids built Ancient Egyptian civilization. In this seminar, we will use archaeological and textual material to explore the development of pyramids across Ancient Egypt's history. More specifically, we will investigate how pyramids shaped kingship and government, economics, architecture, religious ideology and social structure. In doing so, we will interact with, and learn to appreciate, a culture and people with a very different worldview from our own. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 292V	Mapping Music Through the Digital Humanities	A Cleveland Atlas	3 Units	For all its celebrated preoccupation with rock, Cleveland is home to a wide variety of musical genres: jazz, blues, classical, polka, hip hop, gospel, among many others. Cleveland is also a home on the move, a city of immigration and outmigration, a city of waterways, bridges and commuter rails. Then again, Cleveland is a city of enclaves, borders and barricades, social distance despite geographic nearness. In this seminar, we will ask a fundamental question: is music like a bridge that connects different people in the city or is it a border that structures divisions? To answer this question, we will put digital mapping tools to use in better understanding the musical patterns that shape city life over time. We will examine the links between dominant and subcultural music; analyze music's relationship to socio-economic forces such as segregation, urban decline, suburban flight, and revitalization; and reflect on how music defines Cleveland's place in the national imagination. In the process, students will contribute to a digital atlas of Cleveland's shifting musical soundscape. Music, at once rooted in identity and as rootless as radio waves, presents an alternate lens for understanding the routes and rifts shaping urban life. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 292W	Collectors and Their Collections	3 Units	"The passion for accumulation is upon us," The Atlantic Monthly announced a century ago. "We fill our rooms, our walls, our tables, our desks, with things, things, things."  This observation acknowledges an urge that is just as prevalent today.  Certainly, we see evidence of this collecting behavior everywhere, from pop culture artifacts such as comic books and Magic cards, to "high culture" objects such as artworks and rare books, to esoteric miscellanea such as animal skulls and street-signs.  In this seminar, we will examine what motivates people to seek out objects and bring them together, often in creative and surprising ways.   What is the difference between building a collection and being a hoarder?  Why do some collectors enjoy showing off their collections, while others keep them private?  How has digitalization and social media changed collecting?  Through these questions we will explore the psychological, social, and historical impulses that drive us to fill our spaces with things, as well as how the act of collecting helps us make sense of the world and our place in it. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 292Y	Taking Care of Business: Corporate Governance and the Chief Executive Officer	3 Units	Bezos. Zuckerberg. Gates. Musk. Some of the world's most famous CEOs are household names on par with the brightest media and sports celebrities. But what exactly does a Chief Executive Officer do? How is being a CEO different from simply being the boss or the owner?  In this seminar, we will examine what CEOs do and how their role differs from that of a governing board or other executive leaders in an organization, whether for-profit or not-for-profit. During this seminar students will gain a better understanding of the governance of and organization issues and challenges faced by Chief Executive Officers today. We will examine issues such as to whom are CEOs accountable? What do CEOs spend the bulk of their time working on? What are the main challenges faced by CEOs today? In addition, we will consider the principles of being an effective CEO, the pressures and challenges they face, and how the best ones learn and grow. In doing so, we will think critically about some of the pressing issues that confront CEOs and society in general, such as: At a time of increasing economic inequality, are CEOs paid too much?  Is the level and structure of CEO compensation appropriate? Students will gain a basic understanding of the governance principles associated with running for profit and not-for-profit organizations, develop an understanding of the pressures various stakeholders place on CEOs and further their own development of leadership by examining the leadership styles of CEOs. We will address these questions and more through a combination of case studies, scholarly readings, and interactions with organizational leaders. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 293A	Information, Design, and Culture	3 Units	Information is often regarded as a central feature of contemporary culture, but the concept of information and how it is used, particularly in the information systems that surround our lives, is seldom well understood.  For example, we know that the social media platform Facebook collects large amounts of private, personal data from every user.  What we understand less clearly is that the company then makes its own interpretation of that data and uses it to suggest connections among other users.  What we understand even less well is that the company then gathers the data together into a commodity and sells it to other companies--without permission from the sources of the data.  Further uncertainty comes when those companies, in turn, interpret the data from a new perspective, using it for marketing or some other purpose in politics or scientific research.  The cascade of data, interpretation, and uses can be troubling.  The goal of this seminar is to explore the nature of information; how design shapes the presentation of information in analog and digital products; and how cultural values organize human experience through creative action.  We will focus on some of the most important issues of information and culture in daily life.  For example, we will discuss the relationship between artificial intelligence (AI) and intelligence amplification (IA), the arts of communication that amplify the capabilities of human intelligence.  We will discuss what we mean by the idea of "system" and "systems thinking" in information environments. We will also discuss aspects of design, including the relationship between emotion and reason in design.  Finally, we will explore changing ideas about culture and some of the ethical issues that arise in how we use information. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 293D	Poland in the 20th Century	3 Units	Poland was at the epicenter of modern Europe in the 20th century: WWI and the collapse of the European empires; the bloody Stalinist years; WWII and Hitler's genocide; the communist experiment; the velvet revolutions of the 1980s and the eventual failure of communism. Like many modern nation states, Poland's population is multi-ethnic (including Poles, Jews, and Germans) and has changed over time with wars, shifting borders and nation building. The history of the relationships among these groups, including the social forces and tensions that shaped them, can enrich our understanding of other countries' experiences of economic change, immigration, social movements, national identity formation, and political unrest. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 293E	Gender and War in the U. S.	3 Units	Major wars disrupt and permanently alter power relations and social systems. This seminar looks specifically at the American Revolution, Civil War, and World War II to examine how gender ideologies and signifiers (and points of intersection with race, ethnicity, and class) were experienced, perpetuated, reconfigured and remembered. Students will discuss historical articles that analyze the norms of gender dynamics and how they change over the course of war alongside primary materials by Americans experiencing those norms and changes. We will also analyze two feature films and one documentary to examine how Americans use cultural expression to grapple with gender changes wrought by war. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 293H	Black Deathways in America from Enslavement to Black Lives Matter	3 Units	After the death of George Floyd in June 2020, the #SayTheirNames campaign emerged online, calling on Americans to remember Black victims harmed by police violence. Embedded in this movement was the assertion that Black deaths -like Black lives- matter. This course will investigate the historical roots of this idea through the lens of Black deathways - the various beliefs, rituals, practices, and experiences used by Black Americans to understand death and process grief. How have Black burial rituals, funerary services, and commemorative practices evolved alongside those of other American groups? In what ways are these practices similar to or different from other American practices? How have Black communities used distinctive deathways to counter the political, legal, and social restrictions placed on them throughout American history? Most importantly, how have these deathways functioned as a form of political activism? We will analyze the history of Black deathways in order to determine how death can be both a form of trauma and a way for Black communities to celebrate their identity and find joy in the experience of "homegoing." Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 293K	The History of Islam in South Asia	3 Units	There are more Muslims in South Asia than in any other region in the world - yes, even the Middle East.  We will start our exploration of Islam in South Asia (which includes India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan) in the 8th century.  The history of Islam in the region will provide us an opportunity to study the religion and its practitioners in a wide range of social and political contexts: in cosmopolitan, commercial networks of maritime trade routes; as rulers consolidating empires governing large multi-ethnic and multi-religious populations; as "modernizers" and "traditionalists"; as religious minorities and majorities in different countries of the region.  We will also explore Islam in an array of modern settings: from a nation-state created as a Muslim homeland -- the first country in the world to be formed on the basis of religious identity -- to a rejection of Islam as an adequate basis of national identity that led to the formation of another Muslim-majority country; from democracy to military rule; and, from Cold War politics to the "Global War on Terror." Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSO 293L	The Role of Social Media in Politics	3 Units	We knew social media could be an effective grassroots tool for politicians after Barack Obama used it so effectively in 2008. However, the full power of social media sites like Facebook and Twitter came to be seen by the world after the 2016 election. How will social media influence elections in the future? From community building to troll factories, from local organizing to international interference, we look at the role social media plays in the election of an American president. Does the good of such sites outweigh the bad?  What role does capitalism play in helping these big tech companies get even bigger, unburdened by government oversight? Should they be regulated by the federal government or are they protected by the First Amendment and free speech? Are social media sites really just tech platforms giving everyone a voice or are they actual media companies pedaling content? We will take an in depth look at how politicians, political organizations and governments use social media to target voters, persuade them to change their vote (or simply show up to vote), and the toll it's taking on the public discourse today. Students will learn how to track political organizations' spending, see how they target specific audiences, and how they masquerade political ads as news stories. They will learn how something that started as a place to share baby photos and cat memes is now one of the most important factors in achieving the American presidency today, and how this collision course of social media and politics will impact democratic society in the future. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSO/USSO; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 204	System Thinking	3 Units	This is a seminar course in which students critically examine the way that language is used to model and analyze the social world and its organizations. System thinking is used by business leaders, economists, policy analysts and planners to represent the socio-economic world so that they can manage it. During the seminar, students will read and discuss key works that lay the foundations of system thinking and will apply system thinking techniques to a socio-economic situation of interest to them. The emphasis will be on questioning the premises of system thinking, surfacing its strengths and weaknesses, and grappling with its ethical implications. Some key ideas related to system thinking that will be explored include: information theory, cybernetics, system modeling, language, meta language, modeling and intervention in social systems. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 211	Beethoven and the Age of Revolution	3 Units	Beethoven's music is symbolic of the age and spirit of change which reached its zenith with the French Revolution. Fueled by political, social, and emotional reactions, his oeuvre was remarkable in every way.  From the early works, imitative of Haydn and Mozart, through his truly unique later compositions, Beethoven was revolutionary in his person and in his music.  The course will center around specific Beethoven masterworks which are being presented by University Circle Institutions, and student attendance at these concerts will be required.  Class sessions will involve discussions concerning the historical and cultural setting, influences, and analytic investigation into these masterworks.  Readings will be taken from Joseph Kaman and Alan Tyson (The New Grove Beethoven), Frida Knight (Beethoven and the Age of Revolution), and George Marek (Beethoven: Biography of a Genius).  This course is directed towards the general university student, and no specialized knowledge of music is necessary, although certain rudimentary aspects of musical discourse will be covered. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 229	Art Mirrors Art	3 Units	At the beginning of the Renaissance, about the year 1400, an important new theme arose in painting, sculpture and printmaking--the theme of art about art.  At a time when the status of artists in society was rising, new subjects began to appear in western European art that depicted both the artist and the process of making art.  Self portraits of artists, depictions of Saint Luke painting the Virgin Mary, images of women as artists and muses, classical and mythological stories of art making (Pygmalion and Galatea, Apelles painting the mistress of Alexander the Great), depictions of painting and sculpture studios and of art academies and instruction, scenes of art galleries and collections, still lifes about art, all reflected this new cultural interest in art as a topic in itself.  This seminar will look at individual works of art and subject types to understand what they tell us about the role of the arts and the changing status of the artist in the Renaissance and early modern period, up to the eve of the French Revolution, about 1789.  The works we study will thus be understood as symbolic indicators of social status and ideas about what art meant to European society. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 241	The Birth of the Modern: 1905-1925	3 Units	"The Birth of the Modern: 1905-1925" will attempt to answer the question "What is the modern?" by exploring some of the breakthrough works of literature, music, art, and scientific theory in the first decades of the twentieth century. We will study what characterizes the new modes of thinking or "language" of modernity, developed in experimental work across the arts, the sciences, and the social sciences. We will be examining some of the major manifestos of and statements about the nature of Modernism in order to see how they illuminate, for example, a novel by James Joyce or a painting by Picasso, a composition by Stravinsky, a scientific theory of Einstein's, or a psychological theory of Freud's. At the conclusion of the seminar, students will present their findings and write a research paper about "the modern" as it relates to a field of particular interest to them. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 249	Paris: From Revolution to Globalization	3 Units	This course explores the history of Paris as it became the center of French national life, international culture and politics in the 19th century and a global city in the late 20th. The course acquaints students with the history of Paris as a dynamic environment deeply influenced by industrializing forces during this period. We will study contemporary writings, art and popular culture economic developments, political and military events, and architectural and engineering projects that have profoundly shaped the city and popular responses to it. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 250	Medical Narratives	3 Units	This course examines the relationship between medicine and narrative by exploring the representational structures and narrative conventions that have been used to understand and communicate the experience of illness, to tell stories about the human body, and to diagnose and treat disease. The course focuses on literary texts (including novels, plays, short stories and memoirs) written by doctors, patients, nurses and creative writers, as well as on medical case histories from different cultures and historical periods. It examines such topics as the uses of narrative in medical practice; the uses of metaphor in conceptualizing and representing disease; the ethical dilemmas posed by medical research and practice; the therapeutic value of narrative; the structural similarities (and historical links) between detective fiction and medical case histories; the imaginative function of illness in literature; the cultural myths and iconography of disease in different historical periods; the representation of physical and mental illness and the human body in language and art, and cultural responses to major health crises such as bubonic plague, syphilis, and AIDS. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 275	Colors, Capes, and Characters: American Comics Symbolism	3 Units	The history of the comic book is a vital site for critical questions about intersections of art and popular culture in America. In this course we will not simply read "funny books," but will examine a genre that is as unique as its many colorful protagonists: from Popeye to Superman, Wonder Woman to the X-men, comics have given us larger-than-life characters who are often caricatures of dominant (and sometimes subversive) American ideologies. We will learn not only the history of this unique genre, but will interrogate what it means to truly read comics artistically, politically, culturally, and symbolically. At heart, reading comics in an exercise in interpretation: given visual symbols, what meanings can we take from them? What can comics tell us? And how can we write about them in intelligent, critical ways? In this course we will learn to approach comics through critical thinking strategies; that is, questioning what they are, what they say, and where they come from. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 280	Passport to Eastern Europe	3 Units	Images and texts shape rather than merely reflect the world and its geopolitical structures.  Novels, films, and myths make significant contributions to the varied ways that people make sense of continents, nations, and other (often too conveniently used) geopolitical categories such and the East and West.  After considering the ways in which the European continent has been imagined over the centuries, we will explore texts and films that have contributed to the invention of East Central Europe and the Balkans and continue to shape our understanding of the eastern parts of Europe.  The class will include analyses of current news coverage of this area to unpack representations disseminated by the media and to reflect on the forces that aim to shape our understanding of geopolitical entities.  Ultimately, the course hopes to address geopolitical assumptions, evaluate cultural contexts, and help you think critically about the constructed nature of geopolitical categories. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 284	The Art of Madness	3 Units	Taking a historical approach, this course will examine the relationship between the evolution of social and medical attitudes toward mental illness and fictional representations of madness in literature. Beginning with the early modern period, students will compare period sociological and medical narratives on mental illness to fiction works with representations of madness. In so doing, students will consider how the interactive dynamics of art and science contribute to cultural and social thought. Specific areas of inquiry will include: the development of psychology and its effect on societal perceptions of mental illness; cultural developments that occurred in response to changing perceptions of mental illness over the centuries; and the use of representational structures and narrative conventions in understanding and communicating the experience of mental illness. Other interrogations will include the imaginative function of mental illness in literature (e.g., melancholy's role in creativity); the cultural myths in iconography of mental illness in different historical periods; and ethical dilemmas regarding mental illness as reflected in both medical and literary narratives. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 285V	Castaways and Cannibals: Stories of Empire	3 Units	Through a study of texts that exploit "new world" images like the castaway, the cannibal, the wild man, and the exotic woman, this course explores the ideologies that propelled nineteenth-century imperialism, particularly regarding the British in Australia and South Africa.  The class will consider how British settlers made "homes" in hostile and unfamiliar climates, how they addressed the problem of unfriendly and unequal contact with indigenous peoples, and how contemporary novelists reevaluate the historical past.  The course will work under the premise that contemporary geopolitical realities have been shaped by the imaginative work of British colonialists who, under the principle of terra nullius or "no man's land," claimed the land and the resources of these southern territories and dismissed the very existence of the indigenous peoples that populated them.  The scope of the course will be broadly historical, exploring works that participated in British imperialism, as well as those that take a modern perspective.  Course materials will be drawn from a variety of genres, including fiction, poetry, film, ethnography, natural history, history, and criticism.  Ultimately, students will consider how narratives participate in the shaping of reality and of real-world relations of power. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 286S	Shakesploitation of an Icon: Four Hundred Years of Shakespeare Marketing	3 Units	Following the interregnum in England, William Shakespeare began a long, sustained trajectory as a cultural icon, first in England, but eventually among all English-speaking cultures.  In the process, Shakespeare's works have been reinterpreted, adapted, re-contexted, commoditized, and re-purposed for the sake of art, educational relevance, and entertainment.  In the process, Shakespeare has often become the tool of unabashed commercialism, a practice which has come to be known as "Shakesploitation."  But why is Shakespeare's work so frequently purloined?  Why are out of context references to him so ubiquitous?  Why do people tend to equate the name of Shakespeare with qualities of genius?  Why have his works been continually adapted (often shamelessly) not only for the stage, but into other genres, including operas, paintings, novels and films?  How do we account for the proliferation of Shakespeare-based self-help books such as Shakespeare on Leadership?  Why is the infant stimulation video Baby Shakespeare a best-seller?  This course will explore these questions not only by reading a selection of Shakespeare's most enduring works, but also by examining criticism, adaptations, and marketing strategies that have been applied to Shakespeare's image and works over the last four centuries. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 286U	Puzzled	3 Units	"Puzzled" will look at the practice of puzzle making and puzzle-solving and explore the meaning of puzzles for different cultures throughout history.  We will read works from the disciplines of math, history, anthropology, philosophy, and literature.  We will explore why certain types of puzzles became popular and how puzzles have transferred from one culture to another. We will examine the role of code writing and code-breaking in the military and in the world of business.  We will read examples of fiction and watch films that adopt the form of the puzzle as a narrative device.  We will think about the function of puzzles as instruments to exercise the faculties of reason and logic and as a means of leisure or pleasant distraction.    Students will be asked to both solve and create puzzles over the course of the semester.  They will write analytical essays on topics related to the practice and history of puzzle making and puzzle solving, and they will pursue a research topic that revolves around an issue or problem that has "puzzled" them. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 287T	King Arthur's Days and Knights	3 Units	Few legends have remained popular and vital as long as the story of King Arthur has.  Beginning with brief references in sixth-century histories, Arthur has risen again and again in medieval adventure stories, Victorian lyrics, and contemporary cinema.  Over thirty-five films, in fact, have depicted the adventures of the Round Table.  How can we explain this phenomenon?  To investigate this question, this seminar will trace the development of the legend from its oldest remaining written manifestations to the present day.  A chronological approach will allow us to see how Arthur's story accumulated new elements over time, including the famous love affair between Lancelot and Guinevere and the equally famous quest for the Holy Grail--neither of which appeared in the earliest versions of the story.  We will discuss topics such as what Arthur has represented at different periods in time and how his story changes when it is retold in different genres and media.  We will also consider how writers have adapted Round Table stories to suit political and social agendas.  Finally, to broaden our perspective we will spend a unit exploring legends from a variety of cultures and comparing their presentation of heroism.  Texts will include Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, pieces of Sir Thomas Malory's The Death of Arthur, the indispensable Monty Python and the Holy Grail, and portions of its new incarnation, Spamalot. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 287X	Paris in the Arts	3 Units	Since the late eighteenth century, Paris has been a favorite subject for visual artists and writers alike, as well as the birthplace of several seminal artistic movements, such as Impressionism, Cubism, and the New Wave.  This course will use representations of Paris in the arts as lenses through which the identity and recent history of this major city will come into focus.  Further, stories, photographs, and films that stage the city of Paris and its people will also allow us to explore the broader relationship between art, the city, and the plight of modern man.  The course will include a wide range of artworks, from mid-nineteenth century photographs documenting the destruction of Medieval Paris and the advent of a rational capital, to stories chronicling the fate of hopeful newcomers, and films where the city is treated either as intimate landscape or impersonal grid.  The course will be both discussion based and writing intensive: students will be encouraged to envision class participation and writing assignments as means to analyze collaboratively, as well as individually, the material at hand. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 288C	Fly Fishing: the Sport, the Metaphysics, and the Literature	3 Units	According to WorldCat--the world's largest database of library content--the amount of literature on fly fishing dwarfs that of any other sport. What explains this interest? In this seminar, we will examine the appeal and cultural significance of fly fishing, especially as a site for understanding an individual's relationship to the natural world. We will read both fiction and non-fiction works that will help us explore the fundamental nature of sport, how it varies from other forms of recreation, and whether sport can be considered art. We will also investigate what prompts authors to imbue fly fishing with metaphysical, spiritual, or aesthetic dimensions. And we will study how the intent and style of such works differ from traditional academic research writing, as well as how those elements of craft might be integrated into an effective academic writing style. We will also learn by experiencing some of the sport's skills, including fly tying and casting. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 288I	Diversions: Experimental Stories and New Media	3 Units	In this course, students will study works in which the authors and artists have experimented with traditional linear forms and created stories that are, for instance, labyrinthine, framed, collaged, geometrical, digressive, and even networked. While both print-based and digital texts offer spaces for diverse and deeply engaging written or visual performances, they also require further critical inquiry into the ways in which they create, reflect, or resist social and cultural values. Our focus in this course will be exploring how stories (and other texts) - in print, on screen, on canvas, in digital formats - that don't follow or that play with conventional rules of order encourage us to participate in making sense of our contemporary world.   The goals of the course include: exploring the relationship between form and content in written and visual productions, developing a critical perspective from which to enjoy, assess, and respond creatively to traditional print and multimedia presentations, and making excellent use of research resources at CWRU and cultural resources at University Circle. In addition, students will work to develop their writing and presentation skills and to innovate novel models of research writing. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 288R	Cultural and Ethical Issues in American-Chinese Business Relations	3 Units	The American and Chinese economies are the two biggest economies in the world.  The Chinese economy is the fastest growing large economy in the world.  The dynamic American economy is unique in its combination of large multinational enterprises and small entrepreneurial firms.  The American economy is characterized by a vast private sector, the rule of law, and the largest private capital markets in the world.  The Chinese economy is 30 years into a period of reform from communist industrial organization to "socialism with Chinese characteristics", which includes a significant role for the private sector.  The Chinese economy is still an experiment.  The established American business system exists within a democratic political system, where corporate lobbying has a significant influence on the creation of laws and government policy.  The Chinese economy is still under the tight control of the Chinese Communist Party, a one-party dictatorship.  When Americans go to China to do business, they find the cultural, social, political, and moral systems vastly different than what they are familiar with.  Transparency International Ranks China 27 out of 28 of the most corrupt large economies in the world.  In China, bribery of government officials and kickbacks to sales and purchasing managers is common.  Key questions we will investigate are:  1. In what ways are the two business systems similar and different?  2.What is the nature of Chinese social relations?  How do they differ from American social relations?  What effect do they have on business? 3. What is the nature of the Chinese political system?  What impact does it have on business in China? 4. How do American business people negotiate the Chinese business system? Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 288V	Seclusion, Gender and the Exotic: Imagining the Harem	3 Units	When the term "harem" is invoked, the first image that comes to mind is of scantily clad women living in sequestered opulence in some exotic, yet vaguely "Eastern" place. This image has been reproduced and perpetuated through art, literature and music to the degree that even today, familiar themes of seduction, passivity and mystery related to the harem can be found throughout popular culture.  Historically, gender segregation reaches into antiquity and existed in a variety of forms, cross-culturally. The term "harem" was not used regularly until the 13th century, and then only referred to the specific form of gender segregation used by the Ottoman court. Application of the word "harem" to all women's quarters in other cultures was the result of European contact with the Ottoman Empire, despite the fact that other cultures often had their own, distinct, terminology for women's spaces.  In this seminar, we will explore the history and practice of gender segregation as a means to examine how the idea of the harem was constructed in the Eastern and Western imagination. Under what circumstances did women live separately? How were gendered spaces created, justified and maintained? Where did our image of the harem come from? Using primary and secondary sources, we will examine a selection of histories and representations of the harem in literature, slave and travel narratives, and religion. As the Western idea of the harem is part of what Edward Said theorized as "Orientalism", we will explore Said's theory as well as subsequent theories related to gender and the exotic. In addition, we will look at images of women's quarters from antiquity to the present and listen to representations of the exotic in music. Our goal is not only to study the historical fact of the harem, but also to engage issues related to gender, the exotic and representation from different disciplinary and cultural points of view. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 288Y	Shots in the Dark: Investigating Crime Films	3 Units	Crime movies and their subgenres (Gangster, film noir, detective, police) are the most enduringly popular of all Hollywood genres.  They've been around since the silent era and attest to America's fascination with crime.  But another reason we are so attracted to crime films stems from a pair of contradictory narrative projects that underline the genre.  On the one hand, these films valorize the distinctions between the genre's stock characters--criminal, victim and avenger--in order to affirm the social, moral or institutional order.  On the other hand, crime movies explore the relations between the three roles in order to mount a critique that challenges that order.  In addition to emphasizing film studies, we will study the films for what they say about crime, criminals and criminal law.  As most crime films contain an investigation, so too will the organization of the course.  There are methods for analyzing film just as there are methods for investigating a crime scene.  Investigation requires identifying, collecting, analyzing and interpreting evidence.  We'll start by investigating what makes the genre so enduring--its mise-en-scene, intent or characters?  You will be reporting your findings in three scholarly papers: a formal analysis on a specific film, a sociological analysis of a specific film and a research paper with documentation. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 289A	Do We Have Free Will?	3 Units	Concepts such as freedom, choice, moral responsibility, and autonomy are commonly invoked to describe our sense, as human beings, that our actions and thoughts are really our own. This seems like experiential commonsense-when I choose to read a novel instead of a philosophy text it feels like the decision to do so was made by me, that there was no coercion, or other seen or unseen force, that intervened to make me choose as I did. We extend this logic to the judgment of moral and legal responsibility. If you engage in good behavior, you get the praise; if you do bad things, you are blameworthy.   Despite our self-perception that we freely make decisions and choose our actions, we sometimes invoke the notion that certain events are the result of some prior cause or circumstance that determines what occurs in the present. In this instance, we do not appear to be fully free in our choices because we cannot undo the causes that dictate what is taking place here and now. To the extent that we experience current actions as having a cause in the past, we are flirting with the idea that our behavior is not wholly free, but determined or conditioned by what has come before. Determinism, necessity, fate, destiny, predestination: these are terms typically used to describe the sense that our actions and thoughts are the result of unknown forces or circumstances beyond our control.   This course uses classic and contemporary texts, taken from multiple cultural traditions, to explore the problem of free will and related issues of body/mind dualism and personal identity. Although the term "free will" does not appear in all cultural contexts, found everywhere are questions of whether we are free to act and think as we wish or whether our thoughts and actions are in some way determined. We also read science fiction short stories as thought experiments in order to help us understand the ramifications of various positions on free will and related problems.   This course is discussion-based and writing-intensive. Classes focus on analysis and interpretation of texts and ideas. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 289G	The American West on Film	3 Units	Few geographical areas in the United States contain as many tall tales and mythological figures as the American frontier. From an extreme point of view, the West is the only American myth because no other nation can claim the cowboy, the Native American, or the immigrant worker on the transcontinental railroad. And yet, each of these figures remains spectacularly diverse. We celebrate their variety and lionize their individuality in film, popular novels, and cultural criticism. From the visions of the New World to the conquest of the frontier, the color of the American West proliferates and transforms, defining our culture.  In this course, we will investigate how critics have understood our fascination with the Western frontier. The class will broadly explore version of the frontier in novels, films, and historical accounts.  Reading about the history of the actual west, the course will then examine how the films of the twentieth century alter history in order to express the fantasies and anxieties of their own time.  By studying both history and film, we will be able to interrogate manifest destiny and the myth of American exceptionalism. What makes the West such an integral part of our understanding of America? How has its actual history become myth?  What does the American fascination with the cowboy, the Native American, or the outlaw imply about our nation? Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 289I	The Art of Science	3 Units	This is an interdisciplinary course that will explore the intersection between two disparate but often-connected fields, the history of art and the history of science.  Although these fields are separated on college campuses today, they share a history that is united by a common philosophical question: how do we evaluate and know the world around us?  The documentation of that knowledge is often visual--whether written or painted, tabulated or carved--images play an essential role in the shaping and recording of information. Beginning with the Renaissance revival of Pliny's Natural History (c. 77-79 BCE) this class will focus on the complex ways in which science and art overlap and enrich one another. Topics explored in this course include: mathematical theory and linear perspective; anatomical dissection and naturalism in figure painting; optics, lenses, and realism; Copernicus, Galileo and religious painting; botany and scientific illustration; natural history and fine art collecting, etc. Classes will be supplemented by visits to the Museum of Natural History, the Cleveland Museum of Art, and the Dittrick Museum of Medical History. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 289J	Beauty Myths Today	3 Units	Published just over 20 years ago, Naomi Wolf's influential study "The Beauty Myth" significantly influenced popular thinking about body image.  Analyzing both cultural trends and empirical data, Wolf argued that as women made unprecedented advances in public life in the latter half of the 20th century, they were at the same time held to increasingly unrealistic standards of physical beauty.  Wolf's study not only contributed to extant analyses of sexism in the media, but also introduced to mainstream readers the politics of the representation of women's bodies in popular culture.  This course will examine to what extent Wolf's original claim hold true today.  In other words, what physical standards must one meet in order to be considered professionally and personally successful?  In exploring this question, we will look at the origins and current workings of the American beauty industry, considering the changing representation of the ideal body throughout the 20th century.  We'll read texts by historians, philosophers, novelists, poets, cultural critics, and journalists who examine the politics of beauty. To both (re-)define and trace the continuing effects of beauty myths in the 21st century, we'll consider the rhetoric of ideal womanhood as it shows up in popular texts such as websites promoting anorexia, TV shows about plastic surgery, diet books, magazines, and guides for mothers.  Students will have opportunities to define the beauty myth more broadly, exploring its effects on men and its mediating presence in other cultural sites. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 289X	Identity Theft, 1500-1800	3 Units	Religious persecution during the early modern period (16th-18th centuries) compelled Jews to attend Mass, Muslims to baptize their children and Protestants to count Hail Marys on a rosary. European exploration of Asia, Africa and the Americas inspired an Englishman to pass himself off as Taiwanese and an African to present himself as a European. The choice between marriage and a convert led one woman to cut off her hair, sew her skirt into britches and make herself into a conquistador in Peru. In pursuit of social mobility, courtiers remade themselves to suit the conventions of the court. Posing, passing and pretending, these early modern Europeans crossed lines of religion, gender, race and class. Today we might call some of these figures impostors but praise others as self-made men and women. What was the difference between lying and self-fashioning in early modern Europe? What forces and phenomena compelled people to remake themselves? Was the early modern period of the age of dissimulation? This course explores these questions by reading memoirs, handbooks, inquisitorial documents and plays from the period in light of contemporary theoretical literature. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 289Y	Reading and Writing Biography	3 Units	The study and practice of biography, that is, writing about someone's life, is an important tool for understanding how meaning is constructed. In this class, we will learn some of the history of biography and what it hopes to accomplish in its various sub-genres. Why are biographies so popular? Why are we so interested in them? What do they do? Is it possible to perfectly represent an objective truth of someone or does the discussion of someone else's life require a more symbolic interpretation of things? We will engage in reading and discussing some important and contemporary biographies in a variety of styles and genres from autobiography to works of near-fiction. We will learn how researchers use facts to construct more symbolic narratives around an argument that tells a story about someone's life in a way that engages with important issues of self, audience, and the location of truth. As our final research project, we will undertake our own biographical projects where we will do primary research in order to construct focused narratives of people of our own choosing. To work up to this point, we will work on our own autobiographies, look at the lives of things, and look at some films which foreground the narrative of life. This course will be of great use to writers and researchers who must be able to communicate by any kind of true account in a way that is both engaging and comprehensive. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 290C	Out of Proportion	3 Units	In this seminar, we will explore the meaning of things great and small, from the largest buildings and greatest distances, to nanotechnology and the smallest viruses.  The seminar's goal will be to inspire critical thinking by confronting our fascination with things expanding and contracting, growing and shrinking, things speeded up and things slowed down.  We will approach the subject from a variety of disciplines - cultural history, psychology, mathematics, philosophy, literature, economics, and the sciences - with the intention of unpacking both the topic itself and the tools that we use to explain our world.  We will ask questions about why we find gigantism and dwarfism unsettling; how we define ugliness and beauty; how we understand the odds and statistics of horrific or wonderful things happening to us; and how this determines our behavior.  After examining theory and examples of things "out of proportion", students will produce a research project that combines primary and secondary sources and will make an argument in behalf of an example that they find compelling. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 290G	Women and Warfare: Reality and Representation	3 Units	Most people do not think of women when they think of war. However, women's lives have been intimately involved with warfare from ancient times to present. Women have fought in combat, supported war efforts in various capacities, sent their husbands and sons to die in wars, and have been wounded, raped, and killed as civilian targets. Despite women's varied war experiences, there are a set of cultural symbols and tropes that have consistently been used to represent women in their relationship to war. Some of these include women waiting, women mourning, women as pacifists, women warriors, and promiscuous women. Through an international and interdisciplinary investigation, this seminar will examine both the disjunctions and the resonances between the historical realities and the cultural representations of women's lives during wartime. Questions it seeks to address are: In what ways have women's roles during wartime remained the same across history? In what ways have women's roles during wartime changed? How are women's wartime roles represented in art, literature, media, and war propaganda? How has women's entry into the armed forces during the twentieth century disrupted cultural stereotypes of women's relationship to warfare? Are there differences between male and female writers--and artists-- representations of women and warfare? How has digital technology changed both military service members' and civilians' relationships to warfare and the public's exposure and access to war images? Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 290O	Everyone's a Critic! The Play	3 Units	Have you ever been to a play and afterwards said to someone, "That was terrible!", or hopefully, "That was incredible!" but found yourself unable to clearly communicate what made it good or bad?  In theater, word of mouth is the best advertising and your words have the power to make or break a production. This course will examine the role of "audience as critic," as well as the role of the professional critic, and the influence each has on the success of live theater.  The student will learn critical skills that will allow them to clearly identify what made a particular production a rousing success, or a dismal failure.  The student will learn the process by which actors, directors and designers bring a play to life, and the analytical skills a critic uses to either keep the play alive, or bring it to an untimely end.  The student will have the opportunity to see live productions of the plays we will discuss in class.  The student will be required to attend at least five theatrical productions over the course of the semester at CWRU's Eldred Theater, the CWRU/CPH MFA collaboration, The Cleveland Playhouse, and other local theaters.  We will compare and contrast these productions with past productions at other regional theaters and on Broadway.  Actors, directors and designers of these local productions will come to class to discuss their process and defend their artistic choices.  We will speak with local, professional theater critics and discuss their praises, and their pans! With the skills learned in this class the student will have the power to help a theater sell out every show, or force them to close the doors forever! Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 290T	Media Responses to 9/11	3 Units	For a generation of Americans, 9/11 was a defining event, the kind that slices life into before and after.  The reverberations of that singular event continue to dominate our lives today, in ways we can readily recognize, and in ways that we cannot.  In this class, we will examine how the discourse around 9/11 has shifted over the course of a decade, from the urgency of screaming newspaper headlines the day after, to the more elegiac responses shaped by novels and films over the years.  We will also examine how different media--from graphic novels to films to novels--have responded to the same event and how these responses have shaped, and continue to shape, our collective narrative about the meaning of that event. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 290U	Poetry for People Who Hate Poetry	3 Units	You don't hate it. In fact, you probably already love poetry, even if you don't know it. You might copy moody indie rock lyrics into your journal or quote the rhymes in a rap verse to your friends. You might hum advertising jingles to yourself; you speak in slang and think in metaphor. Why do we tend to treat only some of these instances of figurative language as poems? Is there a difference between poems and poetry? What can our individual attitudes about poetry reveal about what and whom we value on a cultural scale? In this course we will ask these and other questions about our collective love/hate relationship with poetry. All of this attention to how poems and poetry work will help us understand how our own writing should work.  This course also focuses on the development of independent research skills and the creation of complex, analytic, well-supported arguments. We will write in a variety of lengths and genres; our reading and research will culminate in a project challenging students to compile an anthology of essential "poetry" with a critical introduction. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 290V	Experiencing Mathematics	3 Units	You've studied mathematics, but have you really experienced it? In Love and Math, author and mathematician Edward Frenkel says that, for him, the experience is tantamount to love. Acknowledging that his field suffers from the reputation of being dry and inaccessible, he challenges this negative view by sharing the passion, beauty, and adventure from his career as one of the leading researchers in the groundbreaking Langlands program, the so-called grand unified theory of mathematics. Like Frenkel, we will discuss the appreciation and enjoyment of mathematics. Furthermore, we will consider other ways in which it is useful and interesting to talk about "experiencing mathematics."  The question of what that phrase means is central to the approach we will take toward the various topics covered in class. We will examine cultural attitudes toward mathematicians and mathematics. Similarly, we will investigate the culture of mathematicians themselves, with particular attention to their ideas about community, collaboration, fairness, and merit. We will also look at the ways, from Big Data to high fashion, that the work of mathematicians actively shapes contemporary society. In addition, we will practice problem-solving techniques for contest mathematics; this activity requires no more than a pre-calculus background. You will not be graded on mathematical problems. Instead, you will reflect on your own problem-solving process. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 290Y	Ecotopia: Imagining the Future	3 Units	The present environmental crisis has given rise to diverse imaginative visions of the future. Dystopian novelists and directors have created texts that portray a disastrous future in which humanity refuses to deal with global warming, ocean acidification, and overpopulation. For writers like Aldous Huxley, the future involves a grim vision of a depleted Earth and a human population under threat from its own political madness. Alternatively, writers and filmmakers have imagined hopeful visions of a human future in which we collectively remake society in order to live in harmony with nature. Although dystopian thinkers far outnumber utopians, we will investigate both visions of the future.  More specifically, we will examine these possible futures as ways of thinking about the inter-generational ethical obligation that we have to leave behind positive and sustainable conditions for future generations living on Earth.  This seminar will tackle that challenge by analyzing ecotopian visions of the planet's future and by defining ways of creating a sustainable society. Possible novels and films include Brave New World, Ecotopia, The Road, Snowpiercer, Cloud Atlas, and Oryx and Crake. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 291B	Science (Fiction) Dystopias	3 Units	In 1927 the German science fiction classic Metropolis showed filmgoers a mechanized dystopian nightmare in which humans took on the roles of cogs and levers in a giant machine. Years later, George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four depicted a totalitarian regime reshaping post-war England in a similar way, using surveillance and repetitive activities to turn the population into something less than human. Appropriating science fiction motifs, dystopian narratives have forced us to reconsider how science and technology are used to complicate and at times augment our notion of what it means to be a social animal. In this class, we will consider a range of texts, including novels, short stories, films, and comic books, to explore the interaction between people and the things that they invent. The first half of the course will emphasize traditional utopian texts and readings will include selections from works like Margaret Cavendish's Blazing World (biological utopia), Yevgeny Zamyatin's We (mathematical dystopia), and George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four (technological dystopia). During the second half of the semester we will discuss utopian and dystopian worlds in popular fiction and film, such as science fiction short stories by Harlan Ellison, Alan Moore's V for Vendetta, and Wall-E, to consider how the utopia/dystopia changed in the latter half of the 20th and the beginning of the 21st century. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 291F	Literary Arcadias: Idealized Landscapes and the Intrusion of Reality	3 Units	The literary genre of pastoral has long depicted the simplicity of life in a natural environment--a place situated at a time before environmental exploitation, colonization, and urbanization.  These pastoral retreats are often given the generic name "Arcadia." As many critics and authors have noted, however, literary depictions of Arcadia often expose the delicate balance of conflicting realities: peace and war, rich and poor, rural and urban.  In this seminar, we will investigate what happens when external reality disrupts Arcadia's Edenic space.  Is the creation of these idyllic settings a way of masking the disturbing realities of class inequality, political power, and environmental degradation?  Or are authors attempting to articulate an alternative to them?  As part of our investigation, we will consider how the pastoral genre has evolved over time, noting especially how depictions of Arcadia have responded to various cultural, commercial, and political changes. We will also examine how the idea of Arcadia shapes contemporary culture and our own understanding of the relationship between nature and society in the modern world. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 291G	Revenge, Violence, and Laughter: From Shakespeare to Tarantino	3 Units	Why do laughter and revenge so often go hand in hand? In the third act of Shakespeare's Titus Andronicus, the play's title character, shortly after learning of several acts of grotesque violence enacted on his family - including the rape of his daughter and the killing of his sons - laughs uncontrollably.  When asked why he's laughing, Titus gives two reasons.  First, he says he has "Not another tear to shed," and second, he says it's because continuing to cry would keep him from taking revenge on his enemies.  This course will explore a series of artistic works where characters are victims and perpetrators of extraordinary acts of violence and injustice, and the response--either from the characters themselves or the audience--includes a grotesque laughter.  We'll explore the reasons for this odd conjunction of laughter and revenge, asking the following questions: What is the relationship between pleasure and laughter on the one hand, and justice and revenge on the other?  Is revenge, despite its violence, something to be cheered rather than mourned? Can laughter, as Titus suggests, help correct and fight injustice, where tears do not?  Where is the line between an upright pleasure at justice being done and a sadistic enjoyment of suffering (even when those suffering are wicked)?  Is artistic violence, when exaggerated or extreme, ridiculous rather than shocking? Class discussion will focus on the formal, ethical and social implications of art and literature.  This is to say, we will not only discuss how authors get audiences to laugh at murder and dismemberment, but also the political and ethical results of inviting laughter at things like violence against women, genocide, and capital punishment. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 291H	From Dr. Seuss to Wild Things: Radical Children's Literature	3 Units	What is the first book you remember reading? For most people, their earliest memories are tied to picture books that were read to them or that they encountered in grade school. These books not only introduce children to basic skills, but also to their culture's belief systems. In this course, we will take seemingly simplistic picture books, including Dr. Seuss' "The Cat in the Hat" and David Wiesner's "The Three Pigs" and analyze the underlying messages and the "hidden adult" present in their illustrations and text. We will engage with different theoretical approaches towards children's literature, including visual rhetoric, race studies, and adaptation theory, as we analyze their pictures and prose and the history of American children's literature. The key questions we will explore and answer together include: What is "children's literature?"  What assumptions are made about the readers of these books? What function do the adult producers/purchasers/distributors of these books serve in the creation and circulation of these texts? How does adaptation and transmission of cultural beliefs affect the reader's reaction to picture books? Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 291J	Improvisation in Jazz and Beyond	3 Units	On the surface it might seem that a jazz concert, a medical procedure, and a religious sermon have little in common, but this course examines how all three in fact share certain significant traits.  One of these traits is improvisation--the ability of a performer to respond to unanticipated stimuli and create something new. Another trait is the tension between specialization and integration that develops whenever a highly-trained expert performs with or for non-experts, as in the exchange between musicians and audience, doctors and patients, or clergy and congregants. To answer these questions, we will attend jazz concerts, medical lectures, and church services. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 291K	Risk and Decision Making	Fundamental Concepts and Practices	3 Units	Risk is everywhere.  Some risks are visible and can have potentially significant consequences, such as committing a felony or choosing a life partner.  Other risks can have equally serious consequences, but might not be so evident:  eating breakfast cereal made from genetically modified crops or ignoring that funny-shaped mole on your shoulder, for example.  Sometimes we take risks in situations where we have a lot of control, like deciding to jaywalk when there is no traffic; other times we face risk where we have little control, like choosing a major without being able to predict whether there will be any jobs in that field by the time you graduate.  How do we decide what risks are worth taking?  Are some methods for assessing risk better than others?  How can a better understanding of risk help us improve our decision making, both at the individual and public policy levels?  In this course, we will use simple conceptual frameworks from decision theory and behavioral research to show how we measure risk.  We will also examine how scientists combine historical records, scientific theories, probability, and expert judgment to assess risk.  In addition, we will ask students to respond some of the well-known logical paradoxes, and explain the meaning if their decisions. Finally, we will apply what we learn about risk to a variety of examples from the fields of health, public safety, environmental studies, manufacturing/industrial processes, systems sciences, and finance. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 291Q	P.R., Spin, and Inventing Reality	3 Units	Is it reality or is it spin? We all know the terms--"it's spin," "it's P.R.," "he's a flack"--and none of them are said kindly. Yet, over the past century public relations has become an often invisible multi-billion dollar manipulation of our collective perception of reality. Sometimes this manipulation is benign. But just as often it can weaken our democracy through weapons of words, images, and argument.  This seminar will explore the origins and consequences of this silent, symbolic revolution. We will look at the uses of P.R. today in business, politics, and popular culture; examine the tools used to construct and sell those perceptions; and look into the values underlying these activities. We will do so through both academic and media materials, as well as through writing, research, and discussion.  All of these are intended to deepen your critical thinking and writing skills, and build your research, discussion, and oral presentation strengths.  Students who have received credit for USSO 260 may not receive credit for this course. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 291W	"Never Such Innocence Again"	World War I in Literature and Culture	3 Units	As cities around the globe mark the centennial of World War I (1914-1918), this seminar will explore the relationship between that watershed moment and the varieties of literature and art it inspired. In what ways did "the Great War" shape the direction of twentieth-century culture? How was language itself altered, as new vocabularies emerged (e.g., "shell-shock," "the home front") and previously venerable terms such as "honor" and "sacrifice" acquired radically different connotations? What strategies did writers and artists evolve in order to contend with the magnitude of the conflict and its unprecedented human cost? Assessing the war's impact on Western thought, the poet Philip Larkin famously wrote, "Never such innocence again"--yet this loss of innocence also coincided with the birth of new forms of literary and artistic expression. In this course we will discuss and write about such innovations as they occurred in the visual arts--painting, sculpture, film--and in literary works by Ernest Hemingway, Virginia Woolf, and other writers who used the resources of imaginative literature to grapple with the Great War and its consequences. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 291Z	Marriage Plots	3 Units	Why do so many stories end with a wedding? Our course will consider the form of the marriage plot: we will look at how stories often begin with young(ish) people meeting and falling in love, and how the process of storytelling denies (or frustrates) their initial connection. Through the telling of the story, however, the young lovers overcome obstacles in myriad forms: controlling parents, financial insecurity or class differences, religious difference, even magical spells. We will think about what these stories do for their readers and viewers. We will also think about how various other stories--of riots, of government, of dissatisfaction with life--get couched in marriage plots. What is it about a marriage plot that ensures stability, satisfies our desires, and gives us such necessary closure? How does the form of "comedy"--for this is the overarching genre that relies so heavily upon marriage plots--work with and reshape the marriage plot over time? We'll also briefly ponder how supporters of marriage equality have used the marriage plot. Finally, our investigation into the marriage plot will look at marriage plot comedies that refuse to conform to the typical marriage plot: dark humor from a novel like Villette to films like Harold and Maude or The War of the Roses. This course investigates the presence of the marriage plot across multiple literary genres: dramas, novels, film, and television. We will also read and view courtship narratives from across historical periods from the Renaissance until today. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 292A	Drama and Social Protest Movements	3 Units	The complicated relationship between drama and politics dates back to at least ancient Greece. Today, playwrights continue to use political conflict as the basis for dramatic action, as well as use their plays to spark political protest--at times even risking imprisonment or exile. In this course, we will read a collection of protest plays alongside accounts of the protest movements that the plays and playwrights either depicted or participated in. As part of our investigation, we will ask the following questions:  What do these plays tell us about the performative and emotional work done by protest?  What role does theatricality play in the acts of persuasion, criticism, and direct action normally associated with political protest? Do these plays simply reproduce the goals and criticisms of protest movements, or does drama invite a style of social critique that sets it apart from other forms of political speech?  Do these plays present protest as focused on the personal grievances of characters, or do they criticize larger social systems like class, gender, and racial hierarchy?  We will also spend some class time discussing a few more modern anti-war, anti-racist and feminist protest movements, exploring the aesthetics and theatricality of protest and the extent to which they further political change. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 292C	The Moral Suspicion of Money	3 Units	Money is morally suspicious--the root of all sorts of evil. This suspicion isn't merely that bad people do bad things with money; it is that somehow the use of money helps make otherwise good people bad. But money is everywhere, pervasive and practical, and so a technology we both need and distrust. Money prices give us reasons when deciding what to do. But we think that money often gives us "good" reasons to do bad things and bad reasons to do good things. And sometimes assigning certain things monetary values at all seems unreasonable. We use money to express our values, yet complain money often distorts them, or has become a value itself. We use money to relate to each other in mutually beneficial commerce and trade, but worry that money degrades our relations.  In this interdisciplinary course we'll investigate the birth of both money and the idea of its badness. We'll survey history, literature, philosophy, sociology, anthropology, film, and the day's news for culturally varied expressions of, and reactions to, this suspicion. We'll first ask, "What is money?" ("How do things like rocks, metals, shells, or data-bits become, and continue to be, money?") and "What is morality?" ("What might we mean when we claim some act, person, situation, or system is morally better or worse?"). We'll then consider specific suspicions and morally evaluate them, along the way raising questions such as: Why can I rent myself out as a landscaper but not as a prostitute? Is the Iranian kidney market better than U.S. waiting lists, or "bio-violence?" Should Americans with slave ancestors be paid for their family past? Is there a moral difference between a corporate raider and a pirate? What is Aristotle's explanation for why Capitalists often produce crap? Why might Nietzsche think Wall Street's Gordon Gekko might be right that "greed is good?? What does Marx mean when he claims money-driven markets are "alienating?" If money expresses our values, ought anything be above money? Is anything beyond price? Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 292G	Interrogating Bullshit	3 Units	This course examines the role of specious and misleading claims in social, political and economic life. Colloquially, "bullshit" is the label we place on egregiously false statements, but as a verb, "to bullshit," the concept is more nuanced. It denotes indifference to truth rather than an active desire to deceive. Empirically, though, distinguishing between a "lie" and "bullshit" can be as difficult as separating either from truth. This course will examine logical fallacies, scams, conspiracy theories, and the analytic techniques necessary to distinguish truth from bullshit. The course will provide introductory instruction in probability theory, statistics and proper interpretation of statistical data, as well as research design and causal inference. Previous work in statistics is not required. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 292I	The Cinema of Otherness	3 Units	One way that humans understand themselves is to consider some counterpart entity--an Other--against which the Self can be understood.  This Other, though perhaps based on knowledge of a real person or people, is always shaped by the Self's projected fears and desires.  At a cultural level, these projections result in generally held stereotypes that the powerful use to maintain their superior position in a hierarchical relationship.  Movies are one place where stereotypes of the Other are created and maintained.  Movies shape how we see, think and feel toward the Other.  In this course, we will attempt to understand how film manufactures Otherness by studying several key Hollywood movies.  We will examine their use of racial and ethnic categories of Otherness, as well as how they position the viewing Self as white. We will also examine other sites of difference, such as gender, sexual orientation, religion, bodily disfigurement, paying special attention to symbolic representations of these differences in the form of robots, monsters and aliens. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 292K	21st Century American Theater	3 Units	With its roots tracing back to Ancient Greece, theater is one of our earliest forms of storytelling and entertainment.  However, in the age of streaming video on demand, and massively multiplayer online games, can this venerable art form still be considered relevant, when even our movie multiplexes are going by the wayside?  Recent Broadway musicals such as Hamilton have certainly made a powerful case for the theater's continued relevancy, simultaneously breaking box office records and offering innovative approaches to content and form while appealing to younger and non-traditional theater audiences.   In this seminar we will consider a number of major plays and musicals produced on and off Broadway since the year 2000. Among the questions to be considered over the course of the semester: What does it mean to create and experience theater in the context of emerging technologies?  Has theater continued to evolve to address the changing needs and sensibilities of 21st century audiences?  In what ways does it provide a voice to marginalized social groups? In addition to readings and class discussions, students will also be required to attend live performances (both professional and academic) and compose essays offering informed critiques evaluating particular aspects of the theatrical whole. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 292N	Cli-Fi: Addressing Climate Change in Fact, Fiction, and Film	3 Units	This seminar examines the emerging literary genre of Cli-Fi, or climate fiction, which bridges genres such as science fiction and apocalyptic literature as it depicts imagined responses to the damage wrought by global climate change. In the early 1960s, well in advance of compelling scientific evidence of anthropogenic climate change, novelists were already speculating about the effects of global warming. Focusing on fiction, films, and non-fiction writing from the past three decades, we will consider how authors envision the effects of climate change. Specifically, we will read works by historians, journalists, philosophers, scientists, and cultural critics as a foundation for our analysis of several works of fiction. Further, we will consider how visual media, like feature and documentary films, depict the impacts of climate change. Centrally, we will evaluate how climate fiction complements existing popular and academic conversations about our transforming world. Ultimately, responding to the broadening field of narratives about human-generated transformations of the world, we will address climate fiction's potential to influence ethical paths shaped by those who seek to alter the disastrous trajectory that the genre imagines. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 292P	"Hamlet" from Page to Stage to Screen	3 Units	This course asks what makes Hamlet recognizable as Hamlet. Is it a story about a man who needs to revenge his father? Is it "To be or not to be?" Is it Laurence Olivier wearing black and holding a skull? Or is it Simba confronting Scar?  Over the course of the semester, we'll be studying the changing forms Hamlet has taken. We'll think first about the inspirations for Shakespeare's play in Danish sagas and Roman tragedy, and subsequently read Hamlet alongside a variety of reinterpretations and revisions in different media (from short stories, to films, to videogames) spanning 400 years and hailing from across the globe. We will learn about the cultural, social and political contexts that shape how adaptations are produced and received. We'll also think critically about the elements that constitute a particular work of art in a particular medium, and about the processes through which new works can be made out of old ones. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 292Q	The Secret Lives of Animals	3 Units	Animals are instructive. When we study animals, their biological makeups and creaturely habits, we do so with hopes of learning something about them. At the same time, such investigations often betray an interest in our human selves. The study of animals, in scientific and literary laboratories alike, quickly turns to acts of self-discovery: not what it means to be animal, exactly, but what it means to be human-animals. So what more could we learn by cultivating new strategies for listening and new languages for communicating with animals?  This seminar invites students to investigate the secret lives of animals as imagined in a sampling of classical, medieval and modern literatures. Thinking with animals past and present--in fables, manuals, and tales--we will examine human-animal relationships in imagined settings. Over the course of the semester, we will read, view, listen, and perform works in which animals are tasked with teaching moral lessons and testing the ethical obligations of their human audiences. Comparing treatments of companion animals past and present, we will reflect on the many ways literature can guide our evolving relationship to the animal kingdom. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 292S	The Meaning of Life: A Novel Idea	3 Units	According to the critic Walter Benjamin, while short stories can convey a moral, "The 'meaning of life' is really the center about which the novel moves." Many critics share this view, arguing that the very idea of "the meaning of life" emerges alongside of the novel genre because of the ways novels portray individuals thinking about their lives. Novels characters internally reflect, make choices, and interact with others--often over long periods of time and through many changing circumstances. Furthermore, they depict how characters--personal choices--are influenced by a variety of external, social forces. In doing so, novels have offered their readers ways to think about what they value, and why.   This seminar will take up the novel genre as a way to think carefully and deeply about just what the idea of "the meaning of life" involves. We will discuss how various novels have addressed--and continue to address--the desire for fulfillment and purpose. We will begin by examining how it came to be that novels came to be associated with and helped create the very concept of the "meaning of life." Then we read some classic novels to examine how the novel has portrayed the meaning of life. We will conclude the course with a contemporary novel and ask whether or not contemporary novels are creating experiences of meaning in the same way they did hundreds of years ago. If they are, is that meaning still the same? If not, are novels asking different kinds of big questions? Is "the meaning of life" not as vital as it used to be to how novels work? In addressing these questions we will strive to understand the history of this literary form, its uses for our own personal introspection and ethical thinking, as well as the continuing role of novels in our rapidly evolving society. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 292Z	Traditional Martial Arts	3 Units	This seminar will provide students with an understanding of the origins and representation of traditional martial arts through movies, novels, and comics. We will emphasize the moral, historical, and cognitive issues involved in the practice of these older fighting techniques. We will also examine how practitioners might have been forced to compromise some of their tenets to accommodate contemporary life and a broader audience. Additionally, we will see how Martial Arts originates in some countries of Asia, but has evolved nowadays with contributions from many other geographical areas. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 293C	The State, Legitimacy, and Insurgency	3 Units	This seminar investigates why individuals organize themselves into a political state, as well as what happens when they decide a state no longer has legitimate power over them. What responsibilities does a state have, if it is to maintain its authority? Under what conditions can a state lose its legitimacy? When do individuals have a moral responsibility to resist state power? What forms can such resistance take and still be considered moral? In undertaking these questions, we will read a wide range of texts from different disciplines, periods of history, parts of the world, and cultural and religious backgrounds.  The final project will require you to articulate a careful and morally consistent `insurgency in which (i) the form of resistance is appropriate to the nature and degree of the state's failures, and (ii) the moral justification for the `insurgency does not violate the moral reasoning that justified resistance in the first place. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 293H	The Landscape of Memory	3 Units	"Never forget" has become an important command of the twentieth century. For survivors of the worst atrocities in recent history, remembering is seen as both a moral and political duty. But how should the memory of these mass traumas be carried forward in the public sphere? And what forms of commemoration are the most effective, accurate, or enduring? In this course, we will examine the remembering of trauma in a range of public "memory sites," including oral testimonies, published memoirs, monuments, museums, and films. We will also consider postmodern forms of "counter-memory" in contemporary photography and conceptual art. While we will discuss a range of "memory sites," we will focus primarily on those that reflect on the Holocaust and 9/11. We will examine how and why different memorial practices have evolved, and reflect on the value of passing on such horrific memories to future generations. We'll also discuss how the process of remembering alters the meaning of traumatic events. As a culminating project, students will analyze a memorial site or institution, using existing scholarship to investigate the creation of the site, its sources of funding, its design process, and the controversies it created. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 293I	High Art and Guilty Pleasures	3 Units	How, and why, do we draw distinctions between art and entertainment? Lowbrow and highbrow? A crowd-pleasing "flick" and a critic-approved "film?" This seminar will explore the logic of this common sorting process, as well as its consequences. After all, such distinctions historically have been linked with other forms of discrimination--often amplifying or silencing certain voices on the basis of gender, race, or class. In this course we'll investigate these connections between critical evaluation and broader social dynamics, while also engaging critically with our own tastes, values, and received ideas. What makes The Great Gatsby so great? Is there any value in keeping up with the Kardashians? Who determines the criteria that make one work a "classic," the other a "guilty pleasure?" Traversing a range of artworks, novels, comics, and movies, we'll work both the high and the low ends of the cultural spectrum, paying special attention to works that seem to blur or combine the usual categories--compelling us to ask whether great art and guilty pleasures can sometimes be one and the same. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 293J	Adapting and Re-imagining Shakespeare's "The Tempest"	3 Units	In the 400 years since it was written, "The Tempest"--long believed to be Shakespeare's farewell to the theater--has inspired many works of art, literature, and music that have re-imagined the original play. These adaptations reflect changes in artistic and political values over time, resulting in versions of the play that have been characterized as royalist, Christian, feminist, and post-colonial, to name a few.  Its language, plot, characters, and themes also have inspired a variety of non-theatrical adaptations, including works of art and music, poems, films, and comics.  Over the course of the semester, we will read "The Tempest" alongside many of these adaptations, learning to pay attention to the elements that constitute different artistic mediums.  We will discuss the social, historical and political forces and ideas that shape adaptation and the artistic process.  To what extent has "The Tempest" become a conversation between artists from all over the globe, rather than a single play written by Shakespeare towards the end of his career?  How do adaptations of Shakespeare's play--some of which draw attention to its potential racism and sexism--change the way that we see it? Why do certain themes in "The Tempest"--like race, gender, and artistic creation--shift in and out of fashion with adapters and performers of the play? Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 293N	Global Shakespeares	3 Units	The British playwright Ben Jonson famously eulogized his friend and competitor William Shakespeare by saying, "...he was not of an age but for all time." Recently, however, scholars and theater practitioners have been far more engaged with the question of whether Shakespeare is for all nations. In this course, we will consider what it means to read Shakespeare globally. Shakespeare wrote his plays during the first era of British colonial expansion; today, we read those same plays during a supposedly "post-colonial" era. Accordingly, we will ask two related but possibly opposing questions: What did Shakespeare think of the world?  and What does the world think about Shakespeare? In order to answer these questions, we will read three plays in which Shakespeare directly engages issues of cultural difference and empire alongside contemporary adaptations of those plays from Asia, Africa, and the Caribbean. How aware was Shakespeare of the specific cultural identities of the Mediterranean or the "New World?" Conversely, is a work "still" Shakespeare when it has been translated into a different cultural setting? In addition to gaining a finer understanding of Shakespeare's work and its historical context, we will examine how and why Shakespeare's drama can be repurposed in different political and national contexts today. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 293O	Monsters and Disability	3 Units	Why are monsters everywhere in literature, film, and art? How does disability, mental illness, and medicine find their way into cultural fantasies and anxieties? Who or what are the monsters of our own cultural moment? In what ways do monsters represent and reinforce prejudices related to mental illness, disability, race, gender, religion, or nationality? What are the ethical conflicts and demands made by the monster? In this seminar, we will explore the history, art, and ethics of monsters in western culture. Using selections from disability studies, trauma theory, gender studies, critical race studies, and post-colonial studies, we will examine monsters not merely as super-natural creatures, but as figures that stand in for a wide range of "undesirables" and "others." Readings and films for this class will be drawn from the distant medieval past up to modern horror and fantasy films, and will feature the monsters said to live on the edge of the known world, mystical visionaries, sideshow freaks, hallucinatory apparitions, witches, and even a few vampires and werewolves. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 293P	Music in Time and Place: A Window into the Development of American Identity	3 Units	Although American symphonic music grew out of the Western European tradition, it also developed distinct characteristics. Composers marveled at the qualities and character of the young nation, especially the vastness and beauty of its land. An aesthetic sense of the land influenced artists as they sought to capture their perspectives of time and space, as well as the American people themselves, and the role they played in those perspectives. In this course, we will examine a series of symphonic works that specifically reference geographical place in their titles. Through this study we will gain insight into the development of American cultural identity and how the focus of musical works shifted from rural to urban life. To enhance our understanding, we will consider the historical context of these American symphonic works, as well as related works of art. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 293Q	Musical Ethics and Identities from Beethoven to Beyoncé	3 Units	In this course we will examine a number of stylistic and social upheavals in Western music since the early nineteenth century, with the goal of understanding their ethical ramifications (past and present) and their impact on perceptions of identity (social, political, economic, racial/ethnic, sexual, gender). Topics will include Ludwig van Beethoven and Richard Wagner, Modernism and avant-gardism, musical expression and repression under totalitarian regimes, the rock and hip-hop revolutions, and the evolving influence of feminist perspectives on popular music. We will give particular attention to cultural anxieties provoked by innovative music, and to the ways in which new historical trends and our own tastes have been shaped by ethical considerations. To what extent do we gravitate toward music that reinforces our existing beliefs, and to what extent can exposure to new music reorient our beliefs, and our sense of identity as a result? What factors explain strong ethical reactions (positive or negative) to different kinds of music? How do particular genres tend to reflect social or political status, how are cultural taboos broken through music, and in what ethical terms has musical progress historically been defined? How do we reconcile music we might like with offensive views that its creators might have held? Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 293T	Spaces of the Dead	3 Units	The spaces of death--whether garden cemetery or mass grave, cremation urn or Facebook memorial--speak to the values, desires, and conditions of the living. Why do the living commemorate the dead in the way that they do? How do the particularities of these spaces shape the way visitors think about the dead? About the living? In this seminar, we will examine various approaches to representing the often taboo subject of death. The course will begin with an overview of burial practices in the United States, many of which are based on European traditions, while looking at the social and political forces that gave rise to the public cemetery, the funeral industry, and the rituals we currently associate with death in the twenty-first century United States. We will look at American funerary architecture, cross-cultural grief practices, and the documentation of deaths along the US-Mexico border. Students will then consider examples of how spaces of death are written about in contemporary literature. In conjunction, the class will examine how new media projects have changed representations of death in the contemporary imagination. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 293V	Justice and Literary Imagination	3 Units	Contemporary popular culture reflects our fascination with a justice system that sometimes does not appear to be just.  Documentary TV series such as The People v. O.J. Simpson, The Making of a Murderer, and The Staircase are part of a long literary tradition that asks us to consider what happens when laws are not rational or punishments are unjust--and what, if anything, we can or should do about it.  In this seminar, we will read a variety of literary and cinematic works to explore questions related to legal justice, including the difference between the rule of law and equity, the function of evidence and testimony in finding truth, the relationship between justice and punishment, the status of justice in an unequal society, and the various roles that people play within the justice system.  In doing so, we will also consider how law and literature overlap in their emphases on storytelling and interpretation, as well as how both cultivate a tolerance for ambiguity and complexity. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 293W	MeToo: Women Writing Violence Against Women in the 18th-Century Novel	3 Units	In recent years we have seen a growing public discourse surrounding sexual harassment and sexual assault, driven in part by women's use of social media to share their stories. While social media may be new, women have long turned to public narratives to respond to the threat of violence that is a part of their lives. The rise of the novel in the 18th century represents a particularly interesting counterpoint to the rise of social media in our own time. Women had very few legal rights and protections, and combined with economic pressures to marry and social expectations that they remain "virtuous," women had little recourse when they faced sexual harassment or assault. By the end of the 18th century, however, women began to write and publish novels themselves, and in numbers rivaling men. In this class, we will look at a selection of these novels through the lens of current discourse about gender-based violence, sexual harassment, consent, and rape culture. What connections do we find between the 18th century and today? What can we learn from these 18th-century women and these novels? What does this approach reveal about writing, about narrative, and about storytelling?  To answer these questions, we will read novels like Charlotte Temple (1791), The Victim of Prejudice (1799), and Northanger Abbey (1817) alongside narratives like Monica Lewinsky's about her time working in the Clinton White House and Susan Fowler's about her time working at Uber. Framing our discussion will be Kate Manne's landmark book Down Girl: The Logic of Misogyny (2017). Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 293Y	Shakespeare, Race, and Othello Over the Centuries	3 Units	This course explores artistic representations of race, gender, jealousy and evil by examining Shakespeare's Othello, Moor of Venice and adaptations of the work from the 19th, 20th and 21st centuries. Shakespeare tells the story of how Othello, the only black man in the Venetian military, gets driven to murder his wife, Desdemona, by his enigmatic officer, Iago. The play raises questions about racism, misogyny, and tragedy which have been taken up by musicians, filmmakers, visual artists, and novelists over the centuries. Each adaptation of Othello makes subtle changes to the story and characters.  For example, in his operatic version of the story, Giuseppe Verdi has Iago sing, "I believe in a Cruel God," imagining the character as a nihilist, while the hero of Tayeb Saleh's novel ,Season of the Migration of the North, rejects Shakespeare, saying, "I am no Othello, Othello was a lie."  The play's performance history proves equally fascinating because early productions always saw white actors playing the title character while wearing black make-up.  Early black actors in the role faced prejudice, and only recently have they been predominantly cast as Shakespeare's tragic Moor.  Thus, our class will examine performances and adaptations of this story, asking: How do different artistic forms like theater, music, art, and literature each create unique forms of meaning?  To what extent do or should adaptations be faithful to Shakespeare?  What are the different ways of depicting race on stage and in film, and what are the social and political implications of these differences? Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 293Z	Wildest Dreams	Medieval Visions/Modern Visionaries	3 Units	This course surveys sites of dreaming in experimental literature and art. Over the course of the semester, we will sample a range of medieval and modern works that find, in and through dreams, alternatives to their present moment. We will examine utopic and apocalyptic visions, daydream, and nightmare scenarios. Thinking through advances in queer theory, cognitive psychology, and sensory studies, we will explore dreamscapes as potential test sites for problem solving--for getting unstuck, for breaking through, for discovering new narrative and artistic forms. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 294A	The Wild Man Within and Without	3 Units	There have always been myths about "The Wild Man", that figure who exists outside of society, as a kind of living rebuttal to the values of the "civilized" world. These primitives, barbarians, savages, or madmen live off of the land, out in the desert or in the woods, and their stories may be told either to horrify or to enchant. These stories are also rich social documents that illuminate how a culture defines itself in relation to those that it excludes or fears. Whether these myths present wild men as heretics, lunatics, or "noble savages", they exist to tell us something about ourselves and about our animal nature. They also provide a way of understanding, and all too often demonizing, the other. In this class, we will consider myths of wildness across literary history, from the "green men" of Arthurian legend to early colonialist accounts of indigenous peoples to recent portrayals of madmen in contemporary film. How have these myths changed over time, and for what purpose? How have these stories impacted new encounters with foreign cultures? How do they reflect a given culture's relationship with nature? What might the figure of the "Wild Woman" tell us about how a society views its established gender roles and expressions of sexuality or their transgressions? Perhaps most importantly, in what ways do the myths of wildness continue today? In answering these and related questions, we will examine the ways that cultural norms and values are constructed, reinforced, and challenged both in the past and in the present. As the literary critic Earl Miner suggests, the aim of these narratives is not so much to understand the Wild Man as to understand oneself. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 294B	Transgender Literature: Gender Diversity and Reading Beyond Stereotypes	3 Units	Literature and literary genres possess the power to reinforce or revolutionize cultural norms. From love stories to coming-of-age stories, one of the most impactful ways that literary genres reflect and shape society is in the representation of gender and sexuality. Over the generations, literature has evolved with our understanding of human diversity. Contrary to stereotypes that imagine the existence of only two genders, society is increasingly recognizing that there is a wider range of embodiment and identity beyond male and female. Thus, the question arises: how do our books and films on our shelves reflect the experience of transgender, intersex, genderqueer, and other non-binary lives? What texts from the past help us understand the long history of sex and sexuality? What new stories are being told? How is society reflecting and affecting this transgender literature? In this seminar, all people and their questions are welcome as we continue the experiment begun by Edith Anisfield Wolf, who believed that books and reading can transform our world. Following in her mission of social justice and diversity, we will learn how to read beyond stereotypes about gender (and, in the process, about sexuality, disability, class, and race). So let us expand our book shelves together! Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 294D	20th Century American Music and Cultural Criticism	3 Units	We are all familiar with music as a mode of entertainment, an accompaniment to rituals and ceremonies, and as earworms that sell us things. But, have you ever thought about how music works? Not the nuts and bolts of ordering the sounds we call music, but how that same music is implicated in the gendered, racialized, and socioeconomic power structures that order our lives? For example: Is free jazz relevant to the civil rights movement of the 1960s? How and why is disco related to gay pride? What does musical minimalism have to do with capitalism? And how might hip-hop and contemporary beat music be related to racial representation and internet culture?  With questions like these in mind, this seminar investigates American vernacular and art musics of the 20th century as phenomena that create, reproduce, and push at the boundaries of structures of cultural power and value. Using conceptual lenses of representation, appropriation, ideology, experimentation, globalization, and modes of resistance, we will weave through American avant-garde to post-bop, free jazz to Afrofuturism, minimalism to EDM, new-age to hip-hop, and more. This seminar does take music as its primary topic, but it is not a music seminar, per se. Rather, music serves here as a jumping-off point to think critically about the role of art in both creating the world we inhabit as well as informing how we navigate that world. As we approach different musics, we will engage with exemplary musical examples and texts from popular and scholarly sources to help frame our discussions and written responses. Furthermore, we will listen to music both in and out of class with the goal of identifying, describing, and contextualizing what we hear. No previous musical training is required; basic concepts and terminology will be explained in class. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 294G	How to Read a Novel	3 Units	Henry James infamously called novels "large, loose and baggy monsters," and we might well agree with him. Today novels dominate our library and bookstore shelves but sometimes finding time in our busy lives to sit down and read one seems impossible. However, novels might be exactly what we need. Novels can help us to better understand one another. They can help us to better understand ourselves. They can also allow us to escape. Novels can take us places we might otherwise never go, and they can help us to take a break from the stress of our lives. In this class, we will explore what novels can do for us by reading a sample of great novels from the past and present, some of which will be (or at least might seem) familiar from high school or from pop culture. As we read, we will think critically about the act of reading itself: how we read, what we read, why we read, and what keeps us from reading. We will also explore some techniques, approaches, and philosophical questions that can help us better understand and interpret these complicated works--and, hopefully, find the fun and value in reading novels. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 294H	Mapping Spaces: Representations of Place and Mobility in Literature	3 Units	How do our experiences of mobility inform our understanding of the spaces where we live and travel? What barriers or incentives attend the travel of people of diverse socio-economic, national, and ethnic identities? To address such questions, we will study maps and how they represent places, create connections, tell stories about the world, and enforce borders. We will use these maps particularly to help us understand the spatial dynamics of literary texts that tell stories about place and mobility.  Class readings, drawn from genres like fiction, essay, film, and digital documentary, will be concerned with issues of spatial justice and the social and political dynamics of migration and border crossing, especially between the Global North and South.  Paired with this focus on global mobility, we consider the lived, embodied experience of individuals in local places, including our own University Circle, and try to develop insight into how we shape and are shaped by the spaces over which we travel in our everyday lives.  To visualize spaces and practices of travel, we will experiment with digital mapping tools and other platforms that allow for media-rich writing and presentations. We will also continue to develop skills in the conventional and creative processes of research and writing. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 294I	Black Women's Social Thought	3 Units	This course offers an introduction to the variety of Black American and Caribbean women's ideas about US politics and culture, with attention to the symbolic significance and difficulty of their position(s) within the power relations of American race, gender, class, and educational standing.  Readings from social theory and philosophy by these authors examine basic social controversies such as the meaning of justice, the purpose of government, acceptable standards for private and public liberty, the value of sexuality and kinship ties, gender equality, the dynamics of racism, the relationship of truth to error and systematic deception, and the place of history and memory in knowledge. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 294J	The Jazz Age, Revisited	Art & Literature of the 1920s	3 Units	Nearly a century later, the 1920s continue to exert their pull on the popular imagination. For many, the decade summons images of what F. Scott Fitzgerald called the Jazz Age: an era of reckless youth, high living, speakeasies and dance crazes, flappers and bootleggers. Of course, this superficial vision of the "Roaring Twenties" hardly tells the full story of that turbulent decade in the United States and beyond. Yet the rebellious spirit it evokes does convey something of the driving force behind the period's often groundbreaking literary and artistic innovations. In New York City, for instance, the Harlem Renaissance witnessed a remarkable flowering of African American art, literature, and music--while downtown the artists of the Dada movement were playfully undermining the very institutions of art. Across the Atlantic, artists and bohemians of all sorts congregated in Paris, Berlin, and other European capitals to mount related revolutions of word, image, and sound. In this course, we'll revisit the 1920s by way of its literature, art, music, and film. Among other things, we'll see what these artifacts can tell us about the period's racial and sexual politics, about the cultural reverberations of World War I (1914-1918), and about the abiding impact of a historical moment when artists and writers thought that art could change the world. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 294M	Play Anything: Theorizing Videogames	3 Units	Videogames are ubiquitous. They seem to be everywhere, on phones, laptops, handheld devices and dedicated consoles, and they are played by all sorts of people, young and old, as both a solitary activity and a shared social experience. In the popular imagination, videogames are often thought of as entertainment, a mindless diversion. But really they are much more than that. Videogames are media texts, cultural artifacts, interactive artworks and also tools used for military recruiting and training. They are systems that structure social engagement virtually, but like other new media, sometimes they simply reproduce the problematic structures we know in real life. Videogames demand our labor in the pursuit of some random objective; playing is fun but achieving goals and following arbitrary rules is also a kind of work. Perhaps when we play videogames, they also play us. In this seminar, we will track the vigorous debates around videogames in the field of game studies through the writings of theorists, designers and critics (all of them gamers). The course provides a critical and theoretical framework for understanding videogames and videogame culture. Students will analyze and critique a range of videogames, from serious and art games to indie and commercial games. Students will also explore game design firsthand by creating a text-based Twine project. Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
USSY 294O	Shakespeare, Not Shakespeare: The Fidelity Debate in Adaptation Studies	3 Units	It is a truth universally acknowledged, at least in high school English classrooms, that the book is always better than the movie. But is this actually the case? In fact, in recent years, many critics have challenged the assumptions that a film adaptation is necessarily inferior to its literary source and that an adaptation should strive to be as "faithful" to its source as possible. This has been a particularly important discussion for scholars who study Shakespeare. Shakespeareans have long been interested in examining the ways that Shakespeare's texts are realized in performance and repurposed in intellectual history. These critics might ask whether a radical adaptation of one of Shakespeare's plays might be in some ways more faithful to the ' "spirit" of Shakespeare's work than a traditional staging. At the same time, other scholars are focused on examining how adaptations of Shakespeare's plays help to redress the ways that his texts reflect, or may have even contributed to, outmoded cultural values and attitudes. They ask whether it might in fact be unethical to replicate the author's vision if his understanding of the world is out of date or regressive. In this class, we will interrogate these familiar but still pressing, debates, by considering several unconventional adaptations of Shakespeare's plays. These films may not be marketed as being "based on" Shakespeare's plays, but they may invoke his drama, including under- examined or uncomfortable aspects of his drama, all the same. Examining the relationship between Shakespeare's drama and its wildest revisions may encourage us to interrogate our preconceptions about artistic originality and influence. At what point does an adaptation go from being "Shakespeare" to "Not Shakespeare?" Requirements to enroll: 1) Passing letter grade in a First Seminar OR concurrent enrollment in FSTS 100 (if transfer student); AND 2) No previous/concurrent enrollment in FSSY/USSY; OR Requisites not met permission.
UNIV 100	Essential Academic Strategies	0 Unit	This non-credit 5-week seminar is available for first-year and second-year students who are seeking to enhance their time management skills and increase the effectiveness of their study strategies. The seminar runs for one hour per week and is conducted two times a semester - typically beginning in weeks two and eight during the fall semester and weeks two and ten during the spring semester. The enrollment is limited to 10 students per class to ensure time for individualized attention and active participation. Students will be encouraged to monitor how they are changing their approaches to their studies and will be invited to one-on-one appointments with their facilitator(s). Student Advancement & Academic Resources and other interested administrators will facilitate this seminar. Sections will be organized by school if possible to tailor the classroom activities to discipline-specific assignments in their courses. Educational Services for Students (ESS) and other interested administrators will facilitate this seminar.  Sections will be organized by school if possible to tailor the classroom activities to discipline-specific assignments in their courses.
UNIV 102	Navigating Presentation Skills for Academic Success at the American University/CWRU	0 Unit	UNIV 102 is a non-credit, pass/no-pass five-week seminar that will help students develop effective strategies for presenting in American and CWRU classes.  The course will allow students to enhance spoken English skills, discussion skills, and vocabulary use for academic presentations.  The seminar runs for one hour per week, and is facilitated by ESS staff.
UNIV 103	Navigating Reading Skills for Academic Success at the American University/CWRU	0 Unit	UNIV 103 is a non-credit, pass/no-pass five-week seminar that will help students develop effective strategies for academic reading, vocabulary use, and general fluency in English.  The course will also touch on general academic study skills.  The seminar runs for one hour per week, and is facilitated by ESS staff.
UNIV 300	Professional Development for Undergraduate Teaching Assistants	0 Unit	All undergraduate students with teaching assistant responsibilities (UTAs) are requiredby the Office of the Provost to successfully complete training in the form of UNIV 300: Professional Development for UTAs. This course is designed to provide UTAs with skills and knowledge regarding university policies, campus resources, and best practices in teaching and learning. Course components includean online, self-paced webinar and an orientation seminar scheduled at the beginning of each semester. The UNIV 300 learning community will provide UTAs withopportunities to interact and network with peer colleagues serving as teaching assistants.
UNIV 400	Professional Development for Graduate Teaching Assistants	0 Unit	CWRU is committed to ensuring excellence in its academic programs. For this reason, graduate students serving as teaching assistants (GTAs) are of critical importance to the University in fulfilling its educational mission. All graduate and professional school students with teaching assistant responsibilities are, therefore, required by the Office of the Provost to successfully complete training in the form of UNIV 400: Professional Development for GTAs. The training requirement applies to graduate and professional school TAs working with undergraduate or graduate students. UNIV 400 includes an online webinar and an orientation seminar, designed to provide GTAs with skills and knowledge regarding university policies, campus resources, and best practices in teaching and learning. GTAs will also have opportunities to develop peer learning communities in order to network with and support one another.
UNIV 401	Advanced Professional Development for University Teaching	0 Unit	Advanced Professional Development for University Teaching is intended to provide participants with the chance to learn innovative, effective, and evidence-based teaching strategies that are useful in University classrooms. Taught by experienced teachers and graduate teaching assistants, this seminar will feature small group discussions about the Science of Teaching and Learning research literature, opportunities to observe experienced university faculty, and micro teaching sessions. On-the-ground and online learning settings will be incorporated into course activities in an effort to prepare students interested in university teaching with a broad background of learning environments. Participants will receive a certificate of completion and will have transcript evidence acknowledging successful completion of this professional development course.
UNIV 402A	ITA Spoken English Pronunciation	0 Unit	International Teaching Assistants (ITAs) enrolled in UNIV 402A will increase their ability to speak English clearly and to navigate their informal speaking demands.  Specifically, this class focuses on pronunciation skills, including vowels, consonants, syllable stress, word stress, and intonation.  Students will also learn vocabulary and idiomatic expressions that are applicable to academic, professional, and daily life contexts.  Students will employ many of these pronunciation and language skills in their informal presentation assignments throughout the semester.  This course is required of all new ITAs who did not pass the CWRU Spoken English test and received a score that places them in UNIV 402A.   Students must be a graduate teaching assistant and require the course based on the CWRU Spoken English Test.
UNIV 402B	ITA Spoken English Fluency	0 Unit	International Teaching Assistants enrolled in UNIV 402B will increase their ability to speak English fluently and to listen more acutely within formal and informal contexts.  Specifically, this course focuses on skills and strategies needed to function comfortably in the academic community as a Teaching Assistant, as well as a student and colleague.  Students will strengthen their skills by exploring scenarios that involve asking and answering questions, conferencing with students, leading lab or classroom discussions, and other skills relevant to their academic, professional, and daily life contexts.  Students will practice their formal communication skills in their presentation assignments throughout the semester.  This course is required of all new ITAs who did not pass the CWRU Spoken English test and received a score that places then in UNIV 402B.  Students must be a graduate teaching assistant and require the course based on the CWRU Spoken English Test.
UNIV 402C	ITA Presentation Skills	0 Unit	International Teaching Assistants enrolled in UNIV 402C will increase their ability to speak English fluently with advanced vocabulary in formal settings, with emphasis on presentation and instructional skills.  Students in this class will improve their English skills to enhance their teaching assistant responsibilities, including listening attentively, reading critically, and writing e-mails, memos, and reports.  Assignments such as these will be applicable to students' academic community and beyond, in their professional and daily life contexts.  Students will practice their formal communication skills in their presentation assignments throughout the semester.  This course is required of all new ITAs who did not pass the CWRU Spoken English test and received a score that places them in UNIV 402C.  Students must be a graduate teaching assistant and require the course based on the CWRU Spoken English Test.
UNIV 410	Teaching/Clinical Practicum	1 - 9 Units	This course is designed for graduate students who are either teaching or involved in clinical or other internship practicums and require full-time student status.  Permit required.
BIOL 112	Biology's Survival Guide to College: How Stress Impacts a Student's Ability to Thrive	3 Units	Stress can test the limit of an individual's ability to maintain balance, thrive and survive. This non-majors biology course explores how cells, organs and organ systems work together to maintain homeostasis. Equipped with knowledge of how the body functions, students will explore how common stressors experienced by college students (sleep deprivation, lack of relaxation, poor diet, and others) can test the limits of maintaining homeostasis. Understanding the body's stress response and how stress impacts well-being will enable students to make informed decisions about how to promote balance in their own life.
BIOL 114	Principles of Biology	3 Units	A one-semester course in biology designed for the non-major.  A primary objective of this course is to demonstrate how biological principles impact an individual's daily life.  BIOL 114 introduces students to the molecules of life, cell structure and function, respiration and photosynthesis, molecular genetics, heredity and human genetics, evolution, diversity of life, and ecology.  Minimal background is required; however, some exposure to biology and chemistry at the high school level is helpful.  This course is not open to students with credit for BIOL 214 or BIOL 250.  This course does not count toward any Biology degree.
BIOL 116	Introduction to Human Anatomy and Physiology I	3 Units	This is the first course in a two-semester sequence that covers human anatomy and physiology for the non-major.  BIOL 116 covers homeostasis, cell structure and function, membrane transport, tissue types and the integumentary, skeletal, muscular and nervous systems.  This course is not open to students with credit for BIOL 216, BIOL 340, or BIOL 346.  This course does not count toward any Biology degree. Prereq or Coreq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 114) or Requisites Not Met Permission.
BIOL 117	Introduction to Human Anatomy and Physiology II	3 Units	This is the second course in a two-semester sequence that covers human anatomy and physiology for the non-major.  BIOL 117 covers the endocrine, circulatory, respiratory, digestive, lymphatic, urinary systems including acid-base regulation, and reproductive systems.  This course is not open to students with credit for BIOL 216, BIOL 340, or BIOL 346.  This course does not count toward any Biology degree. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 114 and BIOL 116) or Requisites Not Met Permission.
BIOL 205	Climate Change Science and Society	3 Units	This course provides a synoptic, multi-disciplinary understanding of the past, present, and future of anthropogenic climate change by integrating three distinct fields: the earth and environmental sciences, biology and ecology, and history. What is changing in the global climate? Why? How do we know? What should we expect in the future? What can be done? No single discipline can answer these questions fully, and by organizing the course around these big questions, we will demonstrate how different disciplines each contribute essential answers. Course covers diverse sources of evidence for climate change in the past and present, the core mechanisms of climate change at different timescales and their consequences, the impact of climate change on human history and history of the discovery of climate change, climate models and ecological forecasts, the modern politics and diplomacy of climate, climate communication, and multiple paths forward for the earth's physical, ecological, and social systems. Offered as BIOL 205, EEPS 205, and HSTY 205.
BIOL 214	Genes, Evolution and Ecology	3 Units	First in a series of three courses required of the Biology major.  Topics include: biological molecules (focus on DNA and RNA); mitotic and meiotic cell cycles, gene expression, genetics, population genetics, evolution, biological diversity and ecology. Prereq or Coreq: (Undergraduate Student and CHEM 105 or CHEM 111) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 214L	Genes, Evolution and Ecology Lab	1 Unit	First in a series of three laboratory courses required of the Biology major.  Topics include: biological molecules (with a focus on DNA  and RNA); basics of cell structure (with a focus on malaria research); molecular genetics, biotechnology; population genetics and evolution, ecology.  Assignments will be in the form of a scientific journal submission. Prereq or Coreq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 214) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 215	Cells and Proteins	3 Units	Second in a series of three courses required of the Biology major.  Topics include: biological molecules (focus on proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids); cell structure (focus on membranes, energy conversion organelles and cytoskeleton); protein structure-function; enzyme kinetics, cellular energetics, and cell communication and motility strategies. Requirements to enroll: 1) Undergraduate degree seeking student; AND 2) Previous enrollment in BIOL 214 and (CHEM 105 or CHEM 111); AND Previous or concurrent enrollment in CHEM 106 or ENGR 145; OR Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 215L	Cells and Proteins Laboratory	1 Unit	Second in a series of three laboratory courses required of the Biology major.  Topics to include: protein structure-function, enzymes kinetics; cell structure; cellular energetics, respiration and photosynthesis.  In addition, membrane structure and transport will be covered.  Laboratory and discussion sessions offered in alternate weeks. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 214L and Prereq or Coreq: BIOL 215) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 216	Development and Physiology	3 Units	This is the final class in the series of three courses required of the Biology major. As with the two previous courses, BIOL 214 and 215, this course is designed to provide an overview of fundamental biological processes. It will examine the complexity of interactions controlling reproduction, development and physiological function in animals. The Developmental Biology section will review topics such as gametogenesis, fertilization, cleavage, gastrulation, the genetic control of development, stem cells and cloning. Main topics included in the Physiology portion consist of: homeostasis, the function of neurons and nervous systems; the major organ systems and processes involved in circulation, excretion, osmoregulation, gas exchange, feeding, digestion, temperature regulation, endocrine function and the immunologic response.   There are two instructional modes for this course: lecture mode and hybrid mode. In the lecture mode students attend class for their instruction. In the hybrid mode students watch online lectures from the course instructor and attend one discussion section with the course instructor each week. The online content prepares students for the discussion.  Which mode is offered varies depending on the term. Students are made aware of what mode is offered at the time of registration.  The total student effort and course content is identical for both instructional modes. Either instructional mode fulfills the BIOL 216 requirement for the BA and BS in Biology. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 214) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 216L	Development and Physiology Lab	1 Unit	Third in a series of three laboratory courses required of the Biology major. Students will conduct laboratory experiments designed to provide hands-on, empirical laboratory experience in order to better understand the complex interactions governing the basic physiology and development of organisms. Laboratories and discussion sessions offered in alternate weeks. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 214L or BIOL 222L) and Prereq or Coreq: BIOL 216 or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 222L	Introductory Research Lab in Biology	2 Units	This is a Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) in which students will learn modern laboratory skills, conduct authentic research, and effectively communicate research findings orally and in writing. Students will develop ownership of their projects, gain confidence in their ability to conduct research, and will grow to see themselves as true members of the broader scientific community. Prereq or Coreq: BIOL 214 or BIOL 215.
BIOL 223	Vertebrate Biology	3 Units	A survey of vertebrates from jawless fishes to mammals. Functional morphology, physiology, behavior and ecology as they relate to the groups' relationships with their environment. Evolution of organ systems. Two lectures and one laboratory per week. The laboratory will involve a study of the detailed anatomy of the shark and cat used as representative vertebrates. Students are expected to spend at least three hours of unscheduled laboratory each week. This course fulfills a laboratory requirement for the biology major. Prereq: Undergraduate Student or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 224L	Bacteriophage Genome Annotation and Analysis Lab	2 Units	This course is an open-ended research laboratory course in which students will annotate the genome of at least one bacteriophage isolated by students from a previous BIOL 222L: Bacteriophage isolation and purification class. As such, students will learn techniques used in bioinformatics, and develop deeper understanding of gene structure, expression and function. Students will also learn basic phylogenetic analysis and address questions relating to evolution of phage genomes. In the second half of the semester, student groups will design and execute research projects of their own design. Students will also develop oral and written communication skills through informal lab meetings, formal presentations (including poster presentations) and written reports. This course fulfills the Cell and Molecular breadth requirement of the BA and BS in Biology. Prereq: BIOL 222L.
BIOL 225	Evolution	3 Units	Multidisciplinary study of the course and processes of organic evolution provides a broad understanding of the evolution of structural and functional diversity, the relationships among organisms and their environments, and the phylogenetic relationships among major groups of organisms.  Topics include the genetic basis of micro- and macro-evolutionary change, the concept of adaptation, natural selection, population dynamics, theories of species formation, principles of phylogenetic inference, biogeography, evolutionary rates, evolutionary convergence, homology, Darwinian medicine, and conceptual and philosophic issues in evolutionary theory. Offered as ANTH 225, BIOL 225, EEPS 225, HSTY 225, and PHIL 225.
BIOL 240	Personalized Medicine	3 Units	The emphasis of clinical practice is slowly shifting from one-disease and one-treatment-fits-all to more personalized care based on molecular markers of disease risk, disease subtype, drug effectiveness, and adverse drug reactions.  This course, designed for non-biology majors, will introduce how the developments in gene sequencing, genetic markers, and stem cells can be applied for predictive testing and personalized therapies.  Core concepts to be covered include the principles of genetics including the inheritance of traits determined by single genes and by multiple genes, the assignment of risk to particular genetic constitutions, and the nature and use of stem cells.  The emergence of private companies as resources for the performance of the tests, and how the general public will be able to interpret their own data (with or without the access to genetic counselors), will also be covered.  The course will include hands-on laboratory experiences of DNA manipulation and detection using the polymerase chain reaction and gel electrophoresis.  The ethical, legal, and social issues associated with personal genetic testing will also be covered.  This course does not count towards any Biology degree, nor towards the Biology minor. Prereq: Undergraduate Student or Requisites Not Met permission
BIOL 300	Dynamics of Biological Systems: A Quantitative Introduction to Biology	3 Units	This course will introduce students to dynamic biological phenomena, from the molecular to the population level, and models of these dynamical phenomena.  It will describe a biological system, discuss how to model its dynamics, and experimentally evaluate the resulting models.  Topics will include molecular dynamics of biological molecules, kinetics of cell metabolism and the cell cycle, biophysics of excitability, scaling laws for biological systems, biomechanics, and population dynamics.  Mathematical tools for the analysis of dynamic biological processes will also be presented.  Students will manipulate and analyze simulations of biological processes, and learn to formulate and analyze their own models. This course satisfies a laboratory requirement for the biology major. Offered as BIOL 300 and EBME 300.
BIOL 301	Biotechnology Laboratory: Genes and Genetic Engineering	3 Units	Laboratory training in recombinant DNA techniques. Basic microbiology, growth, and manipulation of bacteriophage, bacteria and yeast. Students isolate and characterize DNA, construct recombinant DNA molecules, and reintroduce them into eukaryotic cells (yeast, plant, animal) to assess their viability and function. Two laboratories per week. This course satisfies a laboratory requirement of the B.A. in Biology. This course satisfies an additional laboratory requirement of the B.S. in Biology. Offered as BIOL 301 and BIOL 401. Prereq: Undergraduate Student and BIOL 215 or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 302	Human Learning and the Brain	3 Units	This course focuses on the question, "How does my brain learn and how can its learning best be facilitated?" Each student is required to develop a comprehensive theory about personal learning. These theories will take the form of a major paper which will be expanded and modified throughout the semester. Readings and class discussions will focus on the following topics: learning and education systems, major structures of the brain and their role in learning, neuronal wiring of the brain and how learning changes it, the emotional brain and its essential role in learning, language and the brain, the role of images in learning, memory and learning (and related pathologies, such as PTSD). Students are expected to incorporate information on these topics into their personal theory of learning. In so doing, students are expected to articulate meaningful questions, skillfully employ research and apply their own knowledge to address such questions, produce clear, precise academic prose to explicate their ideas, and provide relevant and constructive criticism during class discussions. Offered as BIOL 302 and COGS 322. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: Undergraduate Student or Requisites Not Met Permission.
BIOL 303	From Blackbox to Toolbox: How Molecular Biology Moves Forward	3 Units	The pioneers of modern biology knew very little about the internal workings of the cell, and they had access to only a very limited set of very low-resolution tools. Yet clean experimental design and careful analysis let them ask and answer fundamental biological questions and enabled the development of better tools to use the next time around. In just seven decades, biologists have built a toolbox that offers astonishing precision and power, but the logic of biological experimentation hasn't changed. In this course, we will study that underlying logic, and what it lets us do. We will read key papers spanning the development of modern biology, from the most basic working-out of the Central Dogma to recent advances. We will pay particular attention to how well the authors used the tools available, and how successfully they accounted for their shortcomings--if indeed they did. The emphasis of the course will be on classroom discussion. In lieu of exams, students will (1) write brief responses to weekly in-class prompts for understanding, (2) write in-depth proposals for a molecular biology research project, and (3) present their proposals orally to the class. These assignments are designed to check that students are keeping up with weekly discussions and synthesizing what they have learned into a deeper understanding of how we develop questions and construct arguments in biological research. This course is offered as a SAGES departmental seminar and fulfills the Cell and Molecular breadth requirement of the B.A. and B.S. in Biology. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: Undergraduate Student and BIOL 215 or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 304	Fitting Models to Data: Maximum Likelihood Methods and Model Selection	3 Units	This course will introduce students to maximum likelihood methods for fitting models to data and to ways of deciding which model is best supported by the data (model selection).  Along the way, students will learn some basic tenets of probability and develop competency in R, a commonly used statistical package.  Examples will be drawn from ecology, epidemiology, and potentially other areas of biology.  The second half of the course is devoted to in-class projects, and students are encouraged to bring their own data.    Offered as BIOL 304 and BIOL 404. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and MATH 121 and MATH 122) or (Undergraduate Student and MATH 125 and MATH 126) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 305	Herpetology	3 Units	Amphibians and reptiles exhibit tremendous diversity in development, physiology, anatomy, behavior and ecology. As a result, amphibians and reptiles have served as model organisms for research in many different fields of biology. This course will cover many aspects of amphibian and reptile biology, including anatomy, evolution, geographical distribution, physiological adaptations to their environment, reproductive strategies, moisture-, temperature-, and food-relations, sensory mechanisms, predator-prey relationships, communication (vocal, chemical, behavioral), population biology, and the effects of venomous snake bite. The graduate version of the course requires a research project and term paper. This course satisfies the Organismal breadth requirement of the B.A. and B.S. in Biology.  Offered as BIOL 305 and BIOL 405. Prereq: Undergraduate Student and BIOL 214 or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 305L	Herpetology Lab	2 Units	This course will combine field and laboratory sessions to investigate the diversity and biology of reptiles and amphibians.  Topics covered will include identification and classification, field research techniques, experimental design and statistical analysis, safe handling of live individuals and working with museum specimens.  Laboratory sessions will include trips to the Squire Valleevue Farm, and may also include trips at the Cleveland Museum of Natural History and the Cleveland Metroparks Zoo. This course satisfies a laboratory requirement of the B.A. in Biology. This course satisfies an additional laboratory requirement of the B.S. in Biology. Prereq or Coreq: BIOL 305.
BIOL 306	Mathematical Analysis of Biological Models	3 Units	This course focuses on the mathematical methods used to analyze biological models, with examples drawn largely from ecology but also from epidemiology, developmental biology, and other areas.  Mathematical topics include equilibrium and stability in discrete and continuous time, some aspects of transient dynamics, and reaction-diffusion equations (steady state, diffusive instabilities, and traveling waves).  Biological topics include several "classic" models, such as the Lotka-Volterra model, the Ricker model, and Michaelis-Menten/type II/saturating responses.  The emphasis is on approximations that lead to analytic solutions, not numerical analysis.  An important aspect of this course is translating between verbal and mathematical descriptions: the goal is not just to solve mathematical problems but to extract biological meaning from the answers we find.   Offered as BIOL 306 and MATH 376. Prereq: Undergraduate Student and (BIOL 300 or MATH 224 or MATH 228) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 307	Evolutionary Biology of the Invertebrates	3 Units	Important events in the evolution of invertebrate life, as well as structure, function, and phylogeny of major invertebrate groups.
BIOL 309	Biology Field Studies	3 Units	Intensive investigation of living organisms in a natural environment. Location of the field site may vary with each course offering, and may be either domestic or international. Topics covered include logistics, biodiversity, and current ecological, environmental, and social issues surrounding the specific ecosystem being studied. Time at the field site will be spent listening to resident lecturers, receiving guided tours, observing and identifying wild organisms in their natural habitat, and conducting a research project. The undergraduate version requires students to plan and conduct a group research project and present results independently. The graduate version requires students to plan, conduct, and present an independent research project. Instructor consent required to register. This course will fulfill a laboratory requirement of the B.A. in Biology. This course will fulfill an additional laboratory requirement of the B.S. in Biology. Course may be repeated for credit up to two times if traveling to a new destination. Offered as BIOL 309 and BIOL 409. Prereq: BIOL 216.
BIOL 311A	Survey of Bioinformatics: Technologies in Bioinformatics	1 Unit	SYBB 311A/411A is a 5-week course that introduces students to the high-throughput technologies used to collect data for bioinformatics research in the fields of genomics, proteomics, and metabolomics. In particular, we will focus on mass spectrometer-based proteomics, DNA and RNA sequencing, genotyping, protein microarrays, and mass spectrometry-based metabolomics. This is a lecture-based course that relies heavily on out-of-class readings. Graduate students will be expected to write a report and give an oral presentation at the end of the course.  SYBB 311A/411A is part of the SYBB survey series which is composed of the following course sequence: (1) Technologies in Bioinformatics, (2) Data Integration in Bioinformatics, (3) Translational Bioinformatics, and (4) Programming for Bioinformatics. Each standalone section of this course series introduces students to an aspect of a bioinformatics project - from data collection (SYBB 311A/411A), to data integration (SYBB 311B/411B), to research applications (SYBB 311C/411C), with a fourth module (SYBB 311D/411D) introducing basic programming skills.  Graduate students have the option of enrolling in all four courses or choosing the individual modules most relevant to their background and goals with the exception of SYBB 411D, which must be taken with SYBB 411A. Offered as SYBB 311A, BIOL 311A and SYBB 411A. Prereq: BIOL 214 and BIOL 215. Coreq: BIOL 311B and BIOL 311C.
BIOL 311B	Survey of Bioinformatics: Data Integration in Bioinformatics	1 Unit	SYBB 311B/411B is a five week course that surveys the conceptual models and tools used to analyze and interpret data collected by high-throughput technologies, providing an entry points for students new to the field of bioinformatics. The knowledge structures that we will cover include: biomedical ontologies, signaling pathways, and interaction networks. We will also cover tools for genome exploration and analysis.   The SYBB survey series is composed of the following course sequence: (1) Technologies in Bioinformatics, (2) Data Integration in Bioinformatics, (3) Translational Bioinformatics, and (4) Programming for Bioinformatics. Each standalone section of this course series introduces students to an aspect of a bioinformatics project - from data collection (SYBB 311A/411A), to data integration (SYBB 311B/411B), to research applications (SYBB 311C/411C), with a fourth module (SYBB 311D/411D) introducing basic programming.   Graduate students have the option of enrolling in all four courses or choosing the individual modules most relevant to their background and goals with the exception of SYBB 411D, which must be taken with SYBB 411A. Offered as SYBB 311B, BIOL 311B, and SYBB 411B. Prereq: BIOL 214 and BIOL 215.  Coreq: BIOL 311A and BIOL 311C.
BIOL 311C	Survey of Bioinformatics: Translational Bioinformatics	1 Unit	SYBB 311C/411C is a longitudinal course that introduces students to the latest applications of bioinformatics, with a focus on translational research. Topics include: `omic drug discovery, pharmacogenomics, microbiome analysis, and genomic medicine. The focus of this course is on illustrating how bioinformatic technologies can be paired with data integration tools for various applications in medicine. The course is organized as a weekly journal club, with instructors leading the discussion of recent literature in the field of bioinformatics. Students will be expected to complete readings beforehand; students will also work in teams to write weekly reports reviewing journal articles in the field.  The SYBB survey series is composed of the following course sequence: (1) Technologies in Bioinformatics, (2) Data Integration in Bioinformatics, (3) Translational Bioinformatics, and (4) Programming for Bioinformatics. Each standalone section of this course series introduces students to an aspect of a bioinformatics project - from data collection (SYBB 311A/411A), to data integration (SYBB 311B/411B), to research applications (SYBB 311C/411C), with a fourth module (SYBB 311D/411D) introducing basic programming.   Graduate students have the option of enrolling in all four courses or choosing the individual modules most relevant to their background and goals with the exception of SYBB 411D, which must be taken with SYBB 411A. Offered as SYBB 311C, BIOL 311C and SYBB 411C. Prereq: BIOL 214 and BIOL 215. Coreq: BIOL 311A and BIOL 311B.
BIOL 312	Introductory Plant Biology	3 Units	This course will provide an overview of plant biology. Topics covered will include: (1) Plant structure, function and development from the cellular level to the whole plant (2) plant diversity, evolution of the bacteria, fungi, algae, bryophytes and vascular plants; (3) adaptations to their environment, plant-animal interactions, and human uses of plants. Prereq: (Undergraduate student and BIOL 215) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 314	Taming the Tree of Life: Phylogenetic Comparative Methods-from Concept to Practical Application	3 Units	"Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution"  --  Dobzhansky Biologists have long been fascinated by the diversity of life. Why are there so many species? Why are some of them similar and others divergent? How has evolution shaped ecological interactions, such as disease-host dynamics? The "tree of life" describes phylogenetic hypotheses for evolutionary history among species, and modern phylogenetic comparative methods allow us to incorporate the tree of life into statistical analyses. This course will introduce phylogenetic comparative methods, why they are needed to answer many biological questions, how they are conducted, and how they can be used to evaluate hypotheses. These methods can be used for any group of organisms, from humans and their diseases, to plants, animals, or fungi. These methods also can be used to address a broad suite of questions in biology, including biomedical, ecological, evolutionary, developmental, and neuromechanical questions. For example, issues of public health can be more deeply addressed using these tools. Students may bring their own data sets, or may use existing data sets, and will develop an independent research project using these tools. Undergraduates will present a poster at a public poster fair, as part of the requirements for the SAGES capstone.  No prior experience with the R statistics language is necessary for this course.   BIOL314 fulfills the requirements for an undergraduate capstone in biology. Offered as BIOL 314 and BIOL 414. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: (Undergraduate student with at least Junior standing and BIOL 214) or Requisite Not Met permission.
BIOL 315	Quantitative Biology Laboratory	3 Units	This course will apply a range of quantitative techniques to explore structure-function relations in biological systems.  Using a case study approach, students will explore causes of impairments of normal function, will assemble diverse sets of information into a database format for the analysis of causes of impairment, will analyze the data with appropriate statistical and other quantitative tools, and be able to communicate their results to both technical and non-technical audiences.  The course has one lecture and one lab per week.  Students will be required to maintain a journal of course activities and demonstrate mastery of quantitative tools and statistical techniques.  Graduate students will have a final project that applies these techniques to a problem of their choice.   Offered as BIOL 315 and BIOL 415. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 214) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 316	Fundamental Immunology	4 Units	Introductory immunology providing an overview of the immune system, including activation, effector mechanisms, and regulation.  Topics include antigen-antibody reactions, immunologically important cell surface receptors, cell-cell interactions, cell-mediated immunity, innate versus adaptive immunity, cytokines, and basic molecular biology and signal transduction in B and T lymphocytes, and immunopathology. Three weekly lectures emphasize experimental findings leading to the concepts of modern immunology. An additional recitation hour is required to integrate the core material with experimental data and known immune mediated diseases. Five mandatory 90 minute group problem sets per semester will be administered outside of lecture and recitation meeting times. Graduate students will be graded separately from undergraduates, and 22 percent of the grade will be based on a critical analysis of a recently published, landmark scientific article.   Offered as BIOL 316, BIOL 416, CLBY 416, PATH 316 and PATH 416. Prereq: BIOL 215 and 215L.
BIOL 318	Introductory Entomology	4 Units	The goal of this course is to discover that, for the most part, insects are not aliens from another planet.  Class meetings will alternate; with some structured as lectures, while others are laboratory exercises.  Sometimes we will meet at the Cleveland Museum of Natural History, or in the field to collect and observe insects.  The 50 minute discussion meeting once a week will serve to address questions from both lectures and lab exercises.  The students will be required to make a small but comprehensive insect collection.  Early in the semester we will focus on collecting the insects, and later, when insects are gone for the winter, we will work to identify the specimens collected earlier.  Students will be graded based on exams, class participation and their insect collections.  This course satisfies either the Organismal breadth requirement of the B.A. and B.S. in Biology, or the laboratory requirement of the B.A. in Biology, or an additional laboratory requirement of the B.S. in Biology.  Offered as BIOL 318 and BIOL 418. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 214 and BIOL 215 and BIOL 216) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 319	Applied Probability and Stochastic Processes for Biology	3 Units	Applications of probability and stochastic processes to biological systems. Mathematical topics will include: introduction to discrete and continuous probability spaces (including numerical generation of pseudo random samples from specified probability distributions), Markov processes in discrete and continuous time with discrete and continuous sample spaces, point processes including homogeneous and inhomogeneous Poisson processes and Markov chains on graphs, and diffusion processes including Brownian motion and the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process.  Biological topics will be determined by the interests of the students and the instructor.  Likely topics include: stochastic ion channels, molecular motors and stochastic ratchets, actin and tubulin polymerization, random walk models for neural spike trains, bacterial chemotaxis, signaling and genetic regulatory networks, and stochastic predator-prey dynamics.  The emphasis will be on practical simulation and analysis of stochastic phenomena in biological systems.  Numerical methods will be developed using a combination of MATLAB, the R statistical package, MCell, and/or URDME, at the discretion of the instructor.  Student projects will comprise a major part of the course. Offered as BIOL 319, ECSE 319, MATH 319, SYBB 319, BIOL 419, EBME 419, MATH 419, PHOL 419, and SYBB 419. Prereq: MATH 224 or MATH 223 and BIOL 300 or BIOL 306 and MATH 201 or MATH 307 or consent of instructor.
BIOL 321	Design and Analysis of Biological Experiments	3 Units	In this laboratory course, students will learn how to use a computer programming language (MATLAB) to design, execute, and analyze biological experiments. The course will begin with basic programming and continue to data output and acquisition, image analysis, and statistics.  Students who are interested in carrying out research projects in any lab setting are encouraged to take this course and use the skills acquired to better organize and analyze their experiments. No prior programming knowledge is assumed. This course satisfies a laboratory requirement of the B.A. in biology. This course satisfies a laboratory or quantitative laboratory requirement of the B.S. in biology. Students will complete a final project on a topic of their choice; graduate students will be required to give an oral presentation of this project. Offered as BIOL 321 and BIOL 421. Counts for CAS Quantitative Reasoning Requirement. Prereq: Undergraduate Student and BIOL 216 or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 322	Sensory Biology	3 Units	The task of a sensory system is to collect, process, store, and transmit information about the environment. How do sensory systems convert information from the environment into neural information in an animal's brain? This course will explore the ecology, physiology, and behavior of the senses across organisms. We will cover introductory neurobiology and principles of sensory system organization before delving more deeply into vision, olfaction, audition, mechanosensation, and multi-modal sensory integration. For each sensory modality, we will consider how the sensory system operates and how its operation affects the organism's behavior and ecology. We will also explore the evolution of sensory systems and their specialization for specific behavioral tasks.  Offered as BIOL 322 and BIOL 422. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 216) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 324	Introduction to Stem Cell Biology	3 Units	This discussion-based course will introduce students to the exciting field of stem cell research.  Students will first analyze basic concepts of stem cell biology, including stem cell niche, cell quiescence, asymmetric cell division, cell proliferation and differentiation, and signaling pathways involved in these processes.  This first part of the course will focus on invertebrate genetic models for the study of stem cells.  In the second part of the course, students will search for primary research papers on vertebrate and human stem cells, and application of stem cell research in regenerative medicine and cancer.  Finally, students will have the opportunity to discuss about ethical controversies in the field.  Students will rotate in weekly presentations, and will write two papers during the semester.  Students will improve skills on searching and reading primary research papers, gain presentation skills, and further their knowledge in related subjects in the fields of cell biology, genetics and developmental biology.  This course may be used as a cell/molecular subject area elective for the B.A. and B.S. Biology degrees. Offered as BIOL 324 and BIOL 424. Prereq: Undergraduate Student and (BIOL 325 or BIOL 326 or BIOL 362) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 325	Cell Biology	3 Units	This course will emphasize an understanding of the structure and function of eukaryotic cells from a molecular viewpoint. We will explore cell activities by answering the questions: What are the critical components of specific cellular processes and how are they regulated? An important part of this course will be appreciation of the experimental evidence that supports our current understanding of cell function.  To achieve this aim, we will highlight a variety of experimental techniques currently used in research, and students will read papers from the primary literature to supplement the text. Topics will include cell structure, protein structure and function, internal organization of the eukaryotic cell, membrane structure and function, protein sorting, organelle biogenesis, and cytoskeleton structure and function.  The course will also cover the life cycles of cells, their interactions with each other and their environment, intracellular signaling and cell death mechanisms. After establishing a detailed understanding of cell biology, we will explore how normal cellular processes go awry, leading to diseases such as cancer.  This course fulfills the Cell and Molecular breadth requirement of the B.A. and B.S. in Biology. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 215) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 326	Genetics	3 Units	Transmission genetics, nature of mutation, microbial genetics, somatic cell genetics, recombinant DNA techniques and their application to genetics, human genome mapping, plant breeding, transgenic plants and animals, uniparental inheritance, evolution, and quantitative genetics. Offered as BIOL 326 and BIOL 426. Prereq: (Undergraduate student and BIOL 214) or Requisites Not Met permission
BIOL 327	Functional Genomics	3 Units	In this course, students will learn how to access and use genomics data to address questions in cell biology, development and evolution. The genome of Drosophila melanogaster will serve as a basis for exploring genome structure and learning how to use a variety of available software to identify similar genes in different species, predict protein sequence and functional domains, design primers for PCR, analyze cis-regulatory sequences, access microarray and RNAseq databases, among others. Classes will be in the format of short lectures, short oral presentations made by students and hands-on experimentation using computers. Discussions will be centered in primary research papers that used these tools to address specific biological questions. A final project will consist of a research project formulated by a group of 2-3 students to test a hypothesis formulated by the students using the bioinformatics tools learned in the course. Graduate students will be required to make additional presentations of research papers. They also will have additional questions in exams and a distinct page requirement on written assignments. This course satisfies a laboratory requirement of the B.A. in Biology. This course satisfies a laboratory or quantitative laboratory requirement of the B.S. in Biology. Offered as BIOL 327 and BIOL 427. Prereq: Undergraduate Student and (BIOL 214L and BIOL 326) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 328	Plant Genomics and Proteomics	3 Units	The development of molecular tools has impacted agriculture as much as human health. The application of new techniques to improve food crops, including the development of genetically modified crops, has also become controversial. This course covers the nature of the plant genome and the role of sequenced-based methods in the identification of the genes. The application of the whole suite of modern molecular tools to understand plant growth and development, with specific examples related agronomically important responses to biotic and abiotic stresses, is included. The impact of the enormous amounts of data generated by these methods and their storage and analysis (bioinformatics) is also considered. Finally, the impact on both the developed and developing world of the generation and release of genetically modified food crops will be covered. Recommended preparation: BIOL 326. Offered as BIOL 328 and BIOL 428. Prereq: Undergraduate Student or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 329	Genome Dynamics	3 Units	We will examine how the physical architecture of the genome facilitates a dynamic genome ecosystem. Topics will be selected from current research in the field, including: how the three dimensional architecture of chromosomes within the nucleus impacts information storage and retrieval, how biochemical phase separation impacts nucleic acid storage (including RNA), how structural features of chromosomes are critical for function, genome engineering approaches, and the clinical implications of mutations in the 3D nuclear architecture. Course materials will come from the primary research literature, supplemented with appropriate background material. This course fulfills the cell and molecular biology breadth requirement of the BA and BS in Biology. Counts as a SAGES Departmental Seminar. Offered as BIOL 329 and BIOL 429. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: Undergraduate Student and BIOL 326 or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 333	The Human Microbiome	3 Units	This departmental seminar is designed to reveal how the abundant community of human-associated microorganisms influence human development, physiology, immunity and nutrition. Using a survey of current literature, this discussion-based course will emphasize an understanding of the complexity and dynamics of human/microbiome interactions and the influence of environment, genetics and individual life histories on the microbiome and human health.  Grades will be based on participation, written assignments, exams, an oral presentation and a final paper.  This class is offered as a SAGES Departmental Seminar and fulfills an Organismal breadth requirement of the BA and BS in Biology. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 214 and BIOL 216) or Requisites Not Met Permission.
BIOL 336	Aquatic Biology	3 Units	Physical, chemical, and biological dynamics of lake ecosystems. Factors governing the distribution, abundance, and diversity of freshwater organisms. This course satisfies the Population Biology/Ecology breadth requirement of the B.A. and B.S. in Biology. Offered as BIOL 336 and BIOL 436. Prereq: Undergraduate Student and BIOL 214 or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 338	Ichthyology	4 Units	Biology of fishes. Students will develop fundamental understanding of the evolutionary history and systematics of fishes to provide a context within which they can address aspects of biology including anatomy, physiology (e.g., in species that change sex; osmoregulation in freshwater vs. saltwater), and behavior (e.g., visual, auditory, chemical, electric communication; social structures), ecology, and evolution (e.g., speciation). We will explore the biodiversity of fishes around the world, with emphasis on Ohio species, by examining preserved specimens, observing captive living specimens, and observing, capturing, and identifying wild fishes in their natural habitats. Practical applications will be emphasized, such as aquaculture, fisheries management, and biomedical research. Course will conclude with an analysis of the current global fisheries crisis that has resulted from human activities. There will be many field trips and networking with the Cleveland Metroparks Zoo, the Cleveland Museum of Natural History, and local, state, and federal government agencies. Some classes meet at the Cleveland Museum of Natural History. This course satisfies a laboratory requirement of the B.A. and B.S. in biology. The graduate version of the course requires a research project and term paper.  Offered as BIOL 338 and BIOL 438. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 216) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 339	Aquatic Biology Laboratory	2 Units	The physical, chemical, and biological limnology of freshwater ecosystems will be investigated. Emphasis will be on identification of the organisms inhabiting these systems and their ecological interactions with each other. This course will combine both field and laboratory analysis to characterize and compare the major components of these ponds. Students will have the opportunity to design and conduct individual projects. This course satisfies a laboratory requirement of the B.A. in Biology. This course satisfies an additional laboratory requirement of the B.S. in Biology. Prereq or Coreq: Undergraduate Student and BIOL 336 or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 340	Human Physiology	3 Units	This course will provide functional correlates to the students' previous knowledge of human anatomy.  Building upon the basic principles covered in BIOL 216 and BIOL 346, the physiology of organs and organ systems of humans, including the musculoskeletal, nervous, cardiovascular, lymphatic, immune, respiratory, digestive, excretory, reproductive, and endocrine systems, will be studied at an advanced level.  The contribution of each system to homeostasis will be emphasized. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 346 and BIOL 215 and BIOL 216) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 341	Basic Biology of Blood and Blood Diseases	3 Units	This course incorporates biology, physiology, biochemistry, and pathology to understand how one of the most important tissues in the human body functions:  blood.  The course will investigate the normal flow of traffic in the body, as well as some of the biological diseases that hinder this flow.  It will focus on understanding the basic and fundamental principles as it relates to biological and disease processes of blood.  The course will apply scientific reasoning and critical thinking in investigating these processes.  Additionally, it will explore the basic understanding of how scientific research in the area of hematology and oncology is conducted and how we apply laboratory discoveries towards treating blood-related disorders.  Our focus will center upon examining the molecular mechanisms associated with bone marrow and several blood disorders.  Specifically, we will study cancer (leukemia and lymphoma), anemia (sickle cell disease), blood coagulation (hemophilia and thrombosis), and atherosclerosis.  Upon completion of this course, students will have gained the knowledge to apply basic biological concepts to larger, complex pathological diseases. This course fulfills the Cell & Molecular Breadth Requirement of the BA and BS in Biology. Prereq: Undergraduate Student and BIOL 214 or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 342	Parasitology	3 Units	This course will introduce students to classical and current parasitology.  Students will discuss basic principles of parasitology, parasite life cycles, host-parasite interaction, therapeutic and control programs, epidemiology, and ecological and societal considerations.  The course will explore diverse classes of parasitic organisms with emphasis on protozoan and helminthic diseases and the parasites' molecular biology.  Group discussion and selected reading will facilitate further integrative learning and appreciation for parasite biology.  This course counts as an elective in the cell/molecular biology subject area for the Biology B.A. and B.S. degrees. Offered as BIOL 342 and BIOL 442. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 214, BIOL 215, BIOL 216 and BIOL 326) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 343	Microbiology	3 Units	The physiology, genetics, biochemistry, and diversity of microorganisms.  The subject will be approached both as a basic biological science that studies the molecular and biochemical processes of cells and viruses, and as an applied science that examines the involvement of microorganisms in human disease as well as in workings of ecosystems, plant symbioses, and industrial processes.  The course is divided into four major areas: bacteria, viruses, medical microbiology, and environmental and applied microbiology. Offered as BIOL 343 and BIOL 443. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 215) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 344	Laboratory for Microbiology	3 Units	Practical microbiology, with an emphasis on bacteria as encountered in a variety of situations.  Sterile techniques, principles of identification, staining and microscopy, growth and nutritional characteristics, genetics, enumeration methods, epidemiology, immunological techniques (including ELISA and T cell identification), antibiotics and antibiotic resistance, chemical diagnostic tests, sampling the human environment, and commercial applications.  One three hour lab plus one lecture per week. Prereq or Coreq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 343) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 345	Mammal Diversity and Evolution	4 Units	This course focuses on the anatomical and taxonomic diversity of mammals in an evolutionary context. The emphasis is on living (extant) mammals, but extinct mammals are also discussed. By the end of the course, students will be able to: (1) describe the key anatomical and physiological features of mammals; (2) name all orders and most families of living mammals; (3) identify a mammal skull to order and family; (4) understand how to create and interpret a phylogenetic tree; (5) appreciate major historical patterns in mammal diversity and biogeography as revealed by the fossil record; (6) read and critique a scientific article dealing with mammal evolution. One weekend field trip to Cleveland Metroparks Zoo; additional individual and group visits to the Cleveland Museum of Natural History. This course satisfies a laboratory requirement for the biology major. Recommended preparation: BIOL 223 Vertebrate Biology, BIOL 225 Evolution, or BIOL 346 Human Anatomy. Offered as ANAT 445 and BIOL 345. Prereq: BIOL 214.
BIOL 346	Human Anatomy	3 Units	Gross anatomy of the human body.  Two lectures and one laboratory demonstration per week. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 216) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 351	Principles of Ecology	3 Units	This lecture course explores spatial and temporal relationships involving organisms and the environment at individual, population, and community levels.  An underlying theme of the course will be neo-Darwinian evolution through natural selection with an emphasis on organismal adaptations to abiotic and biotic environments.  Studies and models will illustrate ecological principles, and there will be some emphasis on the applicability of these principles to ecosystem conservation.  This course satisfies the Population Biology/Ecology breadth requirement of the B.A. and B.S. in Biology. Students taking the graduate level course will prepare a grant proposal in which hypotheses will be based on some aspect of ecological theory.  Offered as BIOL 351 and BIOL 451. Prereq: Undergraduate Student and BIOL 214 or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 351L	Principles of Ecology Laboratory	2 Units	Students in this laboratory course will conduct a variety of ecological investigations that are designed to examine relationships involving organisms and the environment at individual, population, and community levels.  Descriptive and hypothesis-driven investigations will take place at Case Western Reserve University's Squire Valleevue Farm, in both field and greenhouse settings.  The course is designed to explore as well as test a variety of ecological paradigms.  Students taking the graduate level course will prepare a grant proposal in which hypotheses will be based on a select number of lab investigations.  This course satisfies a laboratory requirement for biology majors. Offered as BIOL 351L and BIOL 451L. Prereq or Coreq: Undergraduate Student and BIOL 351 or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 352	Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases	3 Units	This course explores the effects of infectious diseases on populations of hosts, including humans and other animals.  We will use computer models to study how infectious diseases enter and spread through populations, and how factors like physiological and behavioral differences among host individuals, host and pathogen evolution, and the environment affect this spread.  Our emphasis will be on understanding and applying quantitative models for studying disease spread and informing policy in public health and conservation.  To that end, computer labs are the central component of the course.  This course satisfies a laboratory requirement of the B.A. in biology.  This course satisfies a laboratory or quantitative laboratory requirement of the B.S. in biology. Offered as BIOL 352 and BIOL 452. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 214 and (MATH 121 or MATH 125) and (MATH 122 or MATH 126)) or Requisites Not Met permission
BIOL 353	Ecophysiology of Global Change	3 Units	Global change is an emerging threat to human health and economic stability. Rapid changes in climate, land use, and prevalence of non-native species generate novel conditions outside the range of typical conditions under which organisms evolved. Already we are witnessing the global redistribution of plants and animals, changes in the timing of critical life cycle events, and in some cases local extinction of populations. This course explores the impacts of global change on biological systems at levels from individuals to ecosystems; among animals, plants and microbes; across ecological to evolutionary timescales; and from local to global spatial scales. Throughout, physiology is emphasized as a core driver of biological responses to global change. Traditional lectures will be accompanied by discussions of primary literature articles. The laboratory component will involve the development of an independent project at the University Farm, and dissemination of results through traditional (e.g. written paper) and new (e.g. podcast) media. This class will fulfill a laboratory requirement of the B.A. in Biology. This class will fulfill an additional laboratory requirement of the B.S. in Biology. Offered as BIOL 353 and BIOL 453. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 214. Prereq or Coreq: BIOL 216) or Requisites Not Met Permission.
BIOL 357	Backyard Behavior Capstone	3 Units	Interesting animal behavior is all around us.  We need not go into a laboratory to observe it, but laboratory tools can help to understand the behaviors that we encounter every day. We interact with animals in our homes, in forests and wilderness areas and even in our own backyards.  As pet dogs or cats interact with wild squirrels and birds, they provide insights regarding predation, neuromechanics, and mating behaviors, just to list a few concepts.  This course takes advantage of the rich behavior that exists around us to provide a capstone experience for students who have an interest in animal behavior.  The course will be open to 10 senior Biology majors who have emphasized the animal behavior and neurobiology courses offered by the Biology department.  Each student will have taken at least one advanced course in Animal Behavior, Neurobiology, or Neuroethology.  Entry into the course will be by permit, and permits will be issued only after an interview in which each student demonstrates to the instructor a deep interest in animal behavior and underlying neural control systems.  Through classroom discussion, viewing of behaviorally-based video shows, and field trips, each student will choose one behavior to investigate in detail over the course of the semester.  In order to move beyond casual observation to in-depth analysis, video cameras will be available to the students, as well as computer based motion analysis systems.  The class will meet as a group twice weekly.  During this formal classroom period, students will discuss behaviors in general and , as the course progresses, the specific topics that each student is investigating.  They will present journal articles that are relevant to their topics, a prospectus on their intended study, and ultimately describe their projects outside of class time and will present a poster at a public poster fair. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: BIOL 305 or BIOL 318 or BIOL 358 or BIOL 373 or BIOL 374.
BIOL 358	Animal Behavior	3 Units	Ultimately the success or failure (i.e., life or death) of any individual animal is determined by its behavior. This course will be an integrative approach emphasizing experimental studies of animal behavior. You will be introduced to state-of-the-art approaches to the study of animal behavior, including neural and hormonal mechanisms, genetic and developmental mechanisms and finally ecological and evolutionary approaches. We will read and discuss examples of current scientific papers, and learn how animal behaviorists conduct observations and experiments. We will feature guest appearances by research scientists studying subjects relevant to animal behavior. Group discussions will be emphasized. This course may be used as a population/ecology subject area elective for the B.A. and B.S. Biology degrees, and one of the elective core courses required for the Neuroscience B.S. degree.  Offered as BIOL 358 and BIOL 458. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 214, BIOL 215 and BIOL 216) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 358L	Animal Behavior Lab	2 Units	This course will be both a foundations course in animal behavior and an introduction to animal behavior research in settings that may include the Cleveland Metroparks Zoo, campus laboratories, and field settings. Students will gain a basic understanding of the evolutionary basis of behavior that will be complemented by examples of current scientific investigations of behavior. Because this is a laboratory course, the bulk of students' time and effort will be spent conducting laboratory exercises focused on animal behavior and an independent research project of animal behavior. Students will have the option to choose their study species and research question(s) based on a list of options provided by the instructor. Project options will vary each year. This course may be used as a Population biology/ecology area elective and qualifies as a laboratory course for the B.A. and B.S. Biology degrees. Offered as BIOL 358L and BIOL 458L. Prereq: (BIOL 214, BIOL 215 and BIOL 216) or Requisites Not Met permission.  Coreq: BIOL 358.
BIOL 362	Principles of Developmental Biology	3 Units	The descriptive and experimental aspects of animal development. Gametogenesis, fertilization, cleavage, morphogenesis, induction, differentiation, organogenesis, growth, and regeneration.  Students taking the graduate-level course will prepare an NIH-format research proposal as the required term paper. Offered as BIOL 362, BIOL 462 and ANAT 462. Prereq: Undergraduate Student and (BIOL 216 or (EBME 201 and EBME 202)) or Requisites Not Met Permission.
BIOL 364	Research Methods in Evolutionary Biology	3 Units	The process of evolution explains not only how the present diversity of life on earth has formed, but also provides insights into current pressing issues today, including the spread of antibiotic resistance, the causes of geographic variation in genetic diseases, and explanations for modern patterns of extinction risk.  Students in Research Methods in Evolutionary Biology will be introduced to several of the major research approaches of evolutionary biology, including methods of measuring natural selection on the phenotypic and genotypic levels, quantifying the rate of evolution, reconstructing evolutionary relationships, and assessing the factors that affect rates of speciation and extinction.  The course will consist of a combination of interactive lectures, in-class problem solving and data analysis, and the discussion of peer-reviewed scientific papers.  Grades are based on participation in class, discussions and written summaries of published papers, in-class presentations, and two writing assignments. Offered as BIOL 364 and BIOL 464. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: (Undergraduate Student and BIOL 214) or Requisites Not Met Permission.
BIOL 365	Evo-Devo:Evolution of Body Plans and Pathologies	3 Units	This discussion-based course offers a detailed introduction to Evolutionary Developmental Biology. The field seeks to explain evolutionary events through the mechanisms of Developmental Biology and Medical Genetics. The course is structured into different modules. First we will look at the developmental genetic mechanisms that can cause variation and medical pathologies. Then we focus on how alterations of these mechanisms can  generate novel structural changes.  We will then examine a few areas of active debate, where Evo-Devo is attempting to solve major problems in evolutionary biology and congenital birth defects. We will conclude with two writing assignments. Students will be required to present, read, and discuss primary literature in each module. This course is offered as a SAGES Departmental Seminar and fulfills a Cell and Molecular breadth requirement of the BA and BS in Biology.  Offered as BIOL 365 and BIOL 465. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: Undergraduate Student and (BIOL 225 or BIOL 326 or BIOL 362) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 366	Genes, Embryos and Fossils	3 Units	This multidisciplinary seminar course is designed to help students understand fundamental concepts of development and evolution of biological systems. Because scientists communicate their ideas through journal articles, seminars, and in grant proposals, the course will focus upon reading and synthesizing primary literature. In this discussion-based course, students will also learn to effectively present and write on three topics that are at the exciting intersection of genetics, developmental biology, and evolution. Finally, students will be provided with the technical and intellectual skills which are needed to write a grant proposal and a literature review. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: BIOL 225, BIOL 326, BIOL 251, BIOL 362 or BIOL 365.
BIOL 368	Topics in Evolutionary Biology	3 Units	The focus for this course on a special topic of interest in evolutionary biology will vary from one offering to the next. Examples of possible topics include theories of speciation, the evolution of language, the evolution of sex, evolution and biodiversity, molecular evolution. ANAT/ANTH/EEPS/PHIL/PHOL 467/BIOL 468 will require a longer, more sophisticated term paper, and additional class presentation. Offered as ANTH 367, BIOL 368, EEPS 367, PHIL 367, ANAT 467, ANTH 467, BIOL 468, EEPS 467, PHIL 467 and PHOL 467. Prereq: BIOL 225 or equivalent.
BIOL 373	Introduction to Neurobiology	3 Units	How nervous systems control behavior. Biophysical, biochemical and molecular biological properties of nerve cells, their organization into circuitry, and their function within networks. Emphasis on quantitative methods for modeling neurons and networks, and on critical analysis of the contemporary technical  literature in the neurosciences. Term paper required for graduate students. This course satisfies a lab requirement for the B.A. in Biology, and a Quantitative Laboratory requirements for the B.S. in Biology. Offered as BIOL 373, BIOL 473, and NEUR 473.
BIOL 374	Neurobiology of Behavior	3 Units	In this course, students will examine how neurobiologists interested in animal behavior study the linkage between neural circuitry and complex behavior.  Various vertebrate and invertebrate systems will be considered.  Several exercises will be used in this endeavor.  Although some lectures will provide background and context on specific neural systems, the emphasis of the course will be on classroom discussion of specific journal articles. In addition, students will each complete a project in which they will observe some animal behavior and generate both behavioral and neurobiological hypotheses related to it.  In lieu of examinations, students will complete three written assignments, including a theoretical grant proposal, a one-page Specific Aims paper related to the project, and a final project paper.  These assignments are designed to give each student experience in writing biologically-relevant documents.  Classroom discussions will help students understand the content and format of each type document.  They will also present their projects orally to the entire class.  Offered as BIOL 374, BIOL 474 and NEUR 474. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
BIOL 375	Brain Evolution and Function	3 Units	Over 500 million years ago, animals were already walking around, burrowing, and displaying signs of learning and memory. How have brains evolved since then to control the diverse behaviors displayed by animals when escaping predators, courting mates, and interacting socially? In this course we will discuss the origins of brains and how they have adapted to various selective pressures. Through comparisons of animals in different ecological niches, we will also explore how brains function during natural behaviors. Classes will alternate between illustrative lectures and student-led discussions of scientific publications. Students will also report on current studies in the field of evolutionary neuroethology through written exercises. This course satisfies a breadth requirement in population biology and ecology for the BA and BS in Biology or an elective requirement for the Neuroscience BS. Prereq: Undergraduate student and BIOL 216.
BIOL 377	Biorobotics Team Research	3 Units	Many exciting research opportunities cross disciplinary lines. To participate in such projects, researchers must operate in multi-disciplinary teams. The Biorobotics Team Research course offers a unique capstone opportunity for undergraduate students to utilize skills they developed during their undergraduate experience while acquiring new teaming skills. A group of eight students form a research team under the direction of two faculty leaders. Team members are chosen from appropriate majors through interviews with the faculty. They will research a biological mechanism or principle and develop a robotic device that captures the actions of that mechanism. Although each student will cooperate on the team, they each have a specific role, and must develop a final paper that describes the research generated on their aspect of the project. Students meet for one class period per week and two 2-hour lab periods. Initially students brainstorm ideas and identify the project to be pursued. They then acquire biological data and generate robotic designs. Both are further developed during team meetings and reports. Final oral reports and a demonstration of the robotic device occur in week 15. Offered as BIOL 377, EMAE 377, BIOL 467, and EMAE 477. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
BIOL 378	Computational Neuroscience	3 Units	Computer simulations and mathematical analysis of neurons and neural circuits, and the computational properties of nervous systems.  Students are taught a range of models for neurons and neural circuits, and are asked to implement and explore the computational and dynamic properties of these models.  The course introduces students to dynamical systems theory for the analysis of neurons and neural learning, models of brain systems, and their relationship to artificial and neural networks.  Term project required.  Students enrolled in MATH 478 will make arrangements with the instructor to attend additional lectures and complete additional assignments addressing mathematical topics related to the course.   Recommended preparation: MATH 223 and MATH 224 or BIOL 300 and BIOL 306. Offered as BIOL 378, COGS 378, MATH 378, BIOL 478, CSDS 478, EBME 478, ECSE 478, MATH 478 and NEUR 478.
BIOL 379	Transformative Animal Models in Modern Biology	3 Units	Animal models are extremely important in the study of biology and in modern medicine. They allow us to determine fundamental biological mechanisms and cellular and molecular causes of disease. There is logic to how each animal model has found its place in the menagerie of accepted animal models. Certain animal models allow us to test particular hypotheses that may not be possible to address in other animals. Moreover, some animal models are more relevant than others to studying a particular human disease.  This seminar-based course will focus on animal models that either are effective at modeling human disease, approach relevant neurobiological questions, or play a role in translational medicine. The course will focus on mammalian and non-mammalian animal models that are important to biomedical research, including the primate, mouse, zebrafish, and roundworm. Comparisons between popular animal models will be made. This course satisfies the Organismal breadth requirement of the B.A. and B.S. in Biology.  Offered as BIOL 379 and BIOL 479. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: Undergraduate student and (BIOL 326 or BIOL 373) or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 381	Nervous System Development	3 Units	This course will introduce the principles guiding the development of the nervous system. Students will learn molecular mechanisms governing the formation of vertebrate and invertebrate nervous systems and become versed on pioneering research studies leading to major discoveries in the field. This course fulfills the neurobiology core requirement for the B.S. in Neuroscience and the organismal breadth requirement of the B.A. and B.S. in Biology. Offered as BIOL 381 and BIOL 481. Prereq: Undergraduate Student and NEUR 202 or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 385	Seminar on Biological Processes in Learning and Cognition	3 Units	Students will read and discuss research papers on a range of topics relevant to the biological processes that lead to cognition and learning in humans.  Sample topics are: cellular and molecular mechanisms of memory; visual sensory detection of images, movement, and color; role of slow neurotransmitters in synaptic plasticity; cortical distribution of cognitive functions such as working memory, decision making, and image analysis; functions of emotion-structures and their role in cognition; brain structures and mechanisms involved in language creation; others.  Some papers will be assigned and others will be selected by students.  Discussions will focus on the methods used, the experimental results, and the interpretations of significance.  Students will work in groups on a semester project to be presented near the end of the semester. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: Undergraduate Student and BIOL 302 or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 388	Undergraduate Research	1 - 3 Units	Guided laboratory research under the sponsorship of a biology faculty member. May be carried out within the biology department or in associated departments. Appropriate forms must be secured in the biology department office. A written report must be approved by the biology sponsor and submitted to the chairman of the biology department before credit is granted. Only 3 credit-hours may count towards the biology majors or minor.
BIOL 388S	Undergraduate Research - SAGES Capstone	3 Units	Guided laboratory research under the sponsorship of a biology faculty member.  May be carried out within the biology department or in associated departments.  May be taken only one semester during the student's academic career.  Appropriate forms must be secured in the biology department office.  A written report must be approved by the biology sponsor and submitted to the chairman of the biology department before credit is granted.  A public presentation is required. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
BIOL 389	Selected Topics	1 - 3 Units	Individual library research projects completed under the guidance of a biology sponsor. May be carried out within the biology department or in associated departments.  Appropriate forms must be secured in the biology department office. A written report must be approved by the biology sponsor and submitted to the chairman of the biology department before credit is granted. Only 3 credit-hours may count towards the biology majors or minor.
BIOL 389S	Selected Topics in Biology--SAGES Capstone	3 Units	Individual library research projects under the guidance of a biology sponsor.  A major paper must be submitted and approved before credit is awarded.  A public presentation is required. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
BIOL 390	Advanced Undergraduate Research	1 - 3 Units	Offered on a credit only basis. Students may carry out research in biology or related departments, but a biology sponsor is required. Does not count toward the 30 hours required for a major in biology, but may be counted toward the total number of hours required for graduation. A written report must be submitted to the chairman's office and approved before credit is granted. Prereq: BIOL 388 or BIOL 388S
BIOL 396	Undergraduate Research in Evolutionary Biology	3 Units	Students propose and conduct guided research on an aspect of evolutionary biology. The research will be sponsored and supervised by a member of the CASE faculty or other qualified professional. A written report must be submitted to the Evolutionary Biology Steering Committee before credit is granted. Offered as ANTH 396, BIOL 396, EEPS 396, and PHIL 396.
BIOL 398	Modern Human Biological Variation	3 Units	The objectives of this course are to provide students with an introduction to human biological variation and to understand the variation within an evolutionary framework through lecture, readings, discussion, and labs. We will examine the patterns of morphological and genetic variation in modern human populations and discuss the evolutionary explanations for the observed patterns. In order to do this, we will first build a solid foundation in the scientific method, population genetics, and evolutionary theory before exploring the adaptive significance of the observed variation. A major component of the class will be the discussion of the social and health implications of these patterns of biological variation, particularly in the construction and application of the concept of race and its use in medicine. There are three units to the course.  Unit 1 focuses on the fundamentals to understanding biological variation, we will cover basic population genetics, evolution, and the human fossil record.  Unit 2 concentrates on surveying modern human biological variation, examining both morphological and genetic traits, and why these variations exist.  Unit 3 examines how race is constructed using population-based biological differences, its validity, and the implications for health and medicine. This course fulfills the Population and Ecology breadth requirement of the B.A. and B.S. in Biology. Offered as BIOL 398 and BIOL 498. Prereq: Undergraduate Student and BIOL 214 or Requisites Not Met permission.
BIOL 401	Biotechnology Laboratory: Genes and Genetic Engineering	3 Units	Laboratory training in recombinant DNA techniques. Basic microbiology, growth, and manipulation of bacteriophage, bacteria and yeast. Students isolate and characterize DNA, construct recombinant DNA molecules, and reintroduce them into eukaryotic cells (yeast, plant, animal) to assess their viability and function. Two laboratories per week. This course satisfies a laboratory requirement of the B.A. in Biology. This course satisfies an additional laboratory requirement of the B.S. in Biology. Offered as BIOL 301 and BIOL 401.
BIOL 402	Principles of Neural Science	3 Units	Lecture/discussion course covering concepts in cell and molecular neuroscience, principles of systems neuroscience as demonstrated in the somatosensory system, and fundamentals of the development of the nervous system. This course will prepare students for upper level Neuroscience courses and is also suitable for students in other programs who desire an understanding of neurosciences. Recommended preparation: CBIO 453. Offered as BIOL 402 and NEUR 402.
BIOL 404	Fitting Models to Data: Maximum Likelihood Methods and Model Selection	3 Units	This course will introduce students to maximum likelihood methods for fitting models to data and to ways of deciding which model is best supported by the data (model selection).  Along the way, students will learn some basic tenets of probability and develop competency in R, a commonly used statistical package.  Examples will be drawn from ecology, epidemiology, and potentially other areas of biology.  The second half of the course is devoted to in-class projects, and students are encouraged to bring their own data.    Offered as BIOL 304 and BIOL 404. Prereq: MATH 121 and MATH 122 OR MATH 125 and MATH 126 or consent of instructor.
BIOL 405	Herpetology	3 Units	Amphibians and reptiles exhibit tremendous diversity in development, physiology, anatomy, behavior and ecology. As a result, amphibians and reptiles have served as model organisms for research in many different fields of biology. This course will cover many aspects of amphibian and reptile biology, including anatomy, evolution, geographical distribution, physiological adaptations to their environment, reproductive strategies, moisture-, temperature-, and food-relations, sensory mechanisms, predator-prey relationships, communication (vocal, chemical, behavioral), population biology, and the effects of venomous snake bite. The graduate version of the course requires a research project and term paper. This course satisfies the Organismal breadth requirement of the B.A. and B.S. in Biology.  Offered as BIOL 305 and BIOL 405.
BIOL 409	Biology Field Studies	3 Units	Intensive investigation of living organisms in a natural environment. Location of the field site may vary with each course offering, and may be either domestic or international. Topics covered include logistics, biodiversity, and current ecological, environmental, and social issues surrounding the specific ecosystem being studied. Time at the field site will be spent listening to resident lecturers, receiving guided tours, observing and identifying wild organisms in their natural habitat, and conducting a research project. The undergraduate version requires students to plan and conduct a group research project and present results independently. The graduate version requires students to plan, conduct, and present an independent research project. Instructor consent required to register. This course will fulfill a laboratory requirement of the B.A. in Biology. This course will fulfill an additional laboratory requirement of the B.S. in Biology. Course may be repeated for credit up to two times if traveling to a new destination. Offered as BIOL 309 and BIOL 409. Prereq: Graduate Standing.
BIOL 410	Interdisciplinary Team Science	3 Units	Modern science is increasingly a team endeavor, and teams often cross traditional disciplinary boundaries.  While interdisciplinary research can illuminate complex and pressing questions, crossing these boundaries can introduce culture shocks that undermine collaborations.  In this course, students will learn practical skills for building productive collaborations as they design and conduct analyses of an unpublished dataset, with the goal of producing a publishable manuscript.  The emphasis of the course will be on hands-on data analysis, interpretation, data visualization, and writing, in the context of interdisciplinary teams.  Students will build skills in R; previous programming experience is helpful but not required.  There are no exams. Prereq: Graduate standing.
BIOL 414	Taming the Tree of Life: Phylogenetic Comparative Methods-from Concept to Practical Application	3 Units	"Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution"  --  Dobzhansky Biologists have long been fascinated by the diversity of life. Why are there so many species? Why are some of them similar and others divergent? How has evolution shaped ecological interactions, such as disease-host dynamics? The "tree of life" describes phylogenetic hypotheses for evolutionary history among species, and modern phylogenetic comparative methods allow us to incorporate the tree of life into statistical analyses. This course will introduce phylogenetic comparative methods, why they are needed to answer many biological questions, how they are conducted, and how they can be used to evaluate hypotheses. These methods can be used for any group of organisms, from humans and their diseases, to plants, animals, or fungi. These methods also can be used to address a broad suite of questions in biology, including biomedical, ecological, evolutionary, developmental, and neuromechanical questions. For example, issues of public health can be more deeply addressed using these tools. Students may bring their own data sets, or may use existing data sets, and will develop an independent research project using these tools. Undergraduates will present a poster at a public poster fair, as part of the requirements for the SAGES capstone.  No prior experience with the R statistics language is necessary for this course.   BIOL314 fulfills the requirements for an undergraduate capstone in biology. Offered as BIOL 314 and BIOL 414. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
BIOL 415	Quantitative Biology Laboratory	3 Units	This course will apply a range of quantitative techniques to explore structure-function relations in biological systems.  Using a case study approach, students will explore causes of impairments of normal function, will assemble diverse sets of information into a database format for the analysis of causes of impairment, will analyze the data with appropriate statistical and other quantitative tools, and be able to communicate their results to both technical and non-technical audiences.  The course has one lecture and one lab per week.  Students will be required to maintain a journal of course activities and demonstrate mastery of quantitative tools and statistical techniques.  Graduate students will have a final project that applies these techniques to a problem of their choice.   Offered as BIOL 315 and BIOL 415.
BIOL 416	Fundamental Immunology	4 Units	Introductory immunology providing an overview of the immune system, including activation, effector mechanisms, and regulation.  Topics include antigen-antibody reactions, immunologically important cell surface receptors, cell-cell interactions, cell-mediated immunity, innate versus adaptive immunity, cytokines, and basic molecular biology and signal transduction in B and T lymphocytes, and immunopathology. Three weekly lectures emphasize experimental findings leading to the concepts of modern immunology. An additional recitation hour is required to integrate the core material with experimental data and known immune mediated diseases. Five mandatory 90 minute group problem sets per semester will be administered outside of lecture and recitation meeting times. Graduate students will be graded separately from undergraduates, and 22 percent of the grade will be based on a critical analysis of a recently published, landmark scientific article.   Offered as BIOL 316, BIOL 416, CLBY 416, PATH 316 and PATH 416. Prereq: Graduate standing.
BIOL 418	Introductory Entomology	4 Units	The goal of this course is to discover that, for the most part, insects are not aliens from another planet.  Class meetings will alternate; with some structured as lectures, while others are laboratory exercises.  Sometimes we will meet at the Cleveland Museum of Natural History, or in the field to collect and observe insects.  The 50 minute discussion meeting once a week will serve to address questions from both lectures and lab exercises.  The students will be required to make a small but comprehensive insect collection.  Early in the semester we will focus on collecting the insects, and later, when insects are gone for the winter, we will work to identify the specimens collected earlier.  Students will be graded based on exams, class participation and their insect collections.  This course satisfies either the Organismal breadth requirement of the B.A. and B.S. in Biology, or the laboratory requirement of the B.A. in Biology, or an additional laboratory requirement of the B.S. in Biology.  Offered as BIOL 318 and BIOL 418. Prereq: BIOL 214, and BIOL 215, and BIOL 216.
BIOL 419	Applied Probability and Stochastic Processes for Biology	3 Units	Applications of probability and stochastic processes to biological systems. Mathematical topics will include: introduction to discrete and continuous probability spaces (including numerical generation of pseudo random samples from specified probability distributions), Markov processes in discrete and continuous time with discrete and continuous sample spaces, point processes including homogeneous and inhomogeneous Poisson processes and Markov chains on graphs, and diffusion processes including Brownian motion and the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process.  Biological topics will be determined by the interests of the students and the instructor.  Likely topics include: stochastic ion channels, molecular motors and stochastic ratchets, actin and tubulin polymerization, random walk models for neural spike trains, bacterial chemotaxis, signaling and genetic regulatory networks, and stochastic predator-prey dynamics.  The emphasis will be on practical simulation and analysis of stochastic phenomena in biological systems.  Numerical methods will be developed using a combination of MATLAB, the R statistical package, MCell, and/or URDME, at the discretion of the instructor.  Student projects will comprise a major part of the course. Offered as BIOL 319, ECSE 319, MATH 319, SYBB 319, BIOL 419, EBME 419, MATH 419, PHOL 419, and SYBB 419.
BIOL 421	Design and Analysis of Biological Experiments	3 Units	In this laboratory course, students will learn how to use a computer programming language (MATLAB) to design, execute, and analyze biological experiments. The course will begin with basic programming and continue to data output and acquisition, image analysis, and statistics.  Students who are interested in carrying out research projects in any lab setting are encouraged to take this course and use the skills acquired to better organize and analyze their experiments. No prior programming knowledge is assumed. This course satisfies a laboratory requirement of the B.A. in biology. This course satisfies a laboratory or quantitative laboratory requirement of the B.S. in biology. Students will complete a final project on a topic of their choice; graduate students will be required to give an oral presentation of this project. Offered as BIOL 321 and BIOL 421. Counts for CAS Quantitative Reasoning Requirement. Prereq: Graduate standing.
BIOL 422	Sensory Biology	3 Units	The task of a sensory system is to collect, process, store, and transmit information about the environment. How do sensory systems convert information from the environment into neural information in an animal's brain? This course will explore the ecology, physiology, and behavior of the senses across organisms. We will cover introductory neurobiology and principles of sensory system organization before delving more deeply into vision, olfaction, audition, mechanosensation, and multi-modal sensory integration. For each sensory modality, we will consider how the sensory system operates and how its operation affects the organism's behavior and ecology. We will also explore the evolution of sensory systems and their specialization for specific behavioral tasks.  Offered as BIOL 322 and BIOL 422. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: Graduate standing.
BIOL 424	Introduction to Stem Cell Biology	3 Units	This discussion-based course will introduce students to the exciting field of stem cell research.  Students will first analyze basic concepts of stem cell biology, including stem cell niche, cell quiescence, asymmetric cell division, cell proliferation and differentiation, and signaling pathways involved in these processes.  This first part of the course will focus on invertebrate genetic models for the study of stem cells.  In the second part of the course, students will search for primary research papers on vertebrate and human stem cells, and application of stem cell research in regenerative medicine and cancer.  Finally, students will have the opportunity to discuss about ethical controversies in the field.  Students will rotate in weekly presentations, and will write two papers during the semester.  Students will improve skills on searching and reading primary research papers, gain presentation skills, and further their knowledge in related subjects in the fields of cell biology, genetics and developmental biology.  This course may be used as a cell/molecular subject area elective for the B.A. and B.S. Biology degrees. Offered as BIOL 324 and BIOL 424. Prereq: Graduate standing.
BIOL 426	Genetics	3 Units	Transmission genetics, nature of mutation, microbial genetics, somatic cell genetics, recombinant DNA techniques and their application to genetics, human genome mapping, plant breeding, transgenic plants and animals, uniparental inheritance, evolution, and quantitative genetics. Offered as BIOL 326 and BIOL 426.
BIOL 427	Functional Genomics	3 Units	In this course, students will learn how to access and use genomics data to address questions in cell biology, development and evolution. The genome of Drosophila melanogaster will serve as a basis for exploring genome structure and learning how to use a variety of available software to identify similar genes in different species, predict protein sequence and functional domains, design primers for PCR, analyze cis-regulatory sequences, access microarray and RNAseq databases, among others. Classes will be in the format of short lectures, short oral presentations made by students and hands-on experimentation using computers. Discussions will be centered in primary research papers that used these tools to address specific biological questions. A final project will consist of a research project formulated by a group of 2-3 students to test a hypothesis formulated by the students using the bioinformatics tools learned in the course. Graduate students will be required to make additional presentations of research papers. They also will have additional questions in exams and a distinct page requirement on written assignments. This course satisfies a laboratory requirement of the B.A. in Biology. This course satisfies a laboratory or quantitative laboratory requirement of the B.S. in Biology. Offered as BIOL 327 and BIOL 427. Prereq: Graduate standing.
BIOL 428	Plant Genomics and Proteomics	3 Units	The development of molecular tools has impacted agriculture as much as human health. The application of new techniques to improve food crops, including the development of genetically modified crops, has also become controversial. This course covers the nature of the plant genome and the role of sequenced-based methods in the identification of the genes. The application of the whole suite of modern molecular tools to understand plant growth and development, with specific examples related agronomically important responses to biotic and abiotic stresses, is included. The impact of the enormous amounts of data generated by these methods and their storage and analysis (bioinformatics) is also considered. Finally, the impact on both the developed and developing world of the generation and release of genetically modified food crops will be covered. Recommended preparation: BIOL 326. Offered as BIOL 328 and BIOL 428.
BIOL 429	Genome Dynamics	3 Units	We will examine how the physical architecture of the genome facilitates a dynamic genome ecosystem. Topics will be selected from current research in the field, including: how the three dimensional architecture of chromosomes within the nucleus impacts information storage and retrieval, how biochemical phase separation impacts nucleic acid storage (including RNA), how structural features of chromosomes are critical for function, genome engineering approaches, and the clinical implications of mutations in the 3D nuclear architecture. Course materials will come from the primary research literature, supplemented with appropriate background material. This course fulfills the cell and molecular biology breadth requirement of the BA and BS in Biology. Counts as a SAGES Departmental Seminar. Offered as BIOL 329 and BIOL 429. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
BIOL 431	Statistical Methods I	3 Units	Application of statistical techniques with particular emphasis on problems in the biomedical sciences.  Basic probability theory, random variables, and distribution functions.  Point and interval estimation, regression, and correlation.  Problems whose solution involves using packaged statistical programs.  First part of year-long sequence. Offered as ANAT 431, BIOL 431, CRSP 431, PQHS 431 and MPHP 431.
BIOL 432	Statistical Methods II	3 Units	Methods of analysis of variance, regression and analysis of quantitative data.  Emphasis on computer solution of problems drawn from the biomedical sciences.  Design of experiments, power of tests, and adequacy of models.  Offered as BIOL 432, PQHS 432, CRSP 432 and MPHP 432. Prereq: BIOL 431.
BIOL 436	Aquatic Biology	3 Units	Physical, chemical, and biological dynamics of lake ecosystems. Factors governing the distribution, abundance, and diversity of freshwater organisms. This course satisfies the Population Biology/Ecology breadth requirement of the B.A. and B.S. in Biology. Offered as BIOL 336 and BIOL 436.
BIOL 438	Ichthyology	4 Units	Biology of fishes. Students will develop fundamental understanding of the evolutionary history and systematics of fishes to provide a context within which they can address aspects of biology including anatomy, physiology (e.g., in species that change sex; osmoregulation in freshwater vs. saltwater), and behavior (e.g., visual, auditory, chemical, electric communication; social structures), ecology, and evolution (e.g., speciation). We will explore the biodiversity of fishes around the world, with emphasis on Ohio species, by examining preserved specimens, observing captive living specimens, and observing, capturing, and identifying wild fishes in their natural habitats. Practical applications will be emphasized, such as aquaculture, fisheries management, and biomedical research. Course will conclude with an analysis of the current global fisheries crisis that has resulted from human activities. There will be many field trips and networking with the Cleveland Metroparks Zoo, the Cleveland Museum of Natural History, and local, state, and federal government agencies. Some classes meet at the Cleveland Museum of Natural History. This course satisfies a laboratory requirement of the B.A. and B.S. in biology. The graduate version of the course requires a research project and term paper.  Offered as BIOL 338 and BIOL 438. Prereq: Graduate Standing.
BIOL 442	Parasitology	3 Units	This course will introduce students to classical and current parasitology.  Students will discuss basic principles of parasitology, parasite life cycles, host-parasite interaction, therapeutic and control programs, epidemiology, and ecological and societal considerations.  The course will explore diverse classes of parasitic organisms with emphasis on protozoan and helminthic diseases and the parasites' molecular biology.  Group discussion and selected reading will facilitate further integrative learning and appreciation for parasite biology.  This course counts as an elective in the cell/molecular biology subject area for the Biology B.A. and B.S. degrees. Offered as BIOL 342 and BIOL 442. Prereq; Graduate standing and consent of instructor.
BIOL 443	Microbiology	3 Units	The physiology, genetics, biochemistry, and diversity of microorganisms.  The subject will be approached both as a basic biological science that studies the molecular and biochemical processes of cells and viruses, and as an applied science that examines the involvement of microorganisms in human disease as well as in workings of ecosystems, plant symbioses, and industrial processes.  The course is divided into four major areas: bacteria, viruses, medical microbiology, and environmental and applied microbiology. Offered as BIOL 343 and BIOL 443.
BIOL 451	Principles of Ecology	3 Units	This lecture course explores spatial and temporal relationships involving organisms and the environment at individual, population, and community levels.  An underlying theme of the course will be neo-Darwinian evolution through natural selection with an emphasis on organismal adaptations to abiotic and biotic environments.  Studies and models will illustrate ecological principles, and there will be some emphasis on the applicability of these principles to ecosystem conservation.  This course satisfies the Population Biology/Ecology breadth requirement of the B.A. and B.S. in Biology. Students taking the graduate level course will prepare a grant proposal in which hypotheses will be based on some aspect of ecological theory.  Offered as BIOL 351 and BIOL 451.
BIOL 451L	Principles of Ecology Laboratory	2 Units	Students in this laboratory course will conduct a variety of ecological investigations that are designed to examine relationships involving organisms and the environment at individual, population, and community levels.  Descriptive and hypothesis-driven investigations will take place at Case Western Reserve University's Squire Valleevue Farm, in both field and greenhouse settings.  The course is designed to explore as well as test a variety of ecological paradigms.  Students taking the graduate level course will prepare a grant proposal in which hypotheses will be based on a select number of lab investigations.  This course satisfies a laboratory requirement for biology majors. Offered as BIOL 351L and BIOL 451L.
BIOL 452	Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases	3 Units	This course explores the effects of infectious diseases on populations of hosts, including humans and other animals.  We will use computer models to study how infectious diseases enter and spread through populations, and how factors like physiological and behavioral differences among host individuals, host and pathogen evolution, and the environment affect this spread.  Our emphasis will be on understanding and applying quantitative models for studying disease spread and informing policy in public health and conservation.  To that end, computer labs are the central component of the course.  This course satisfies a laboratory requirement of the B.A. in biology.  This course satisfies a laboratory or quantitative laboratory requirement of the B.S. in biology. Offered as BIOL 352 and BIOL 452. Prereq: Graduate standing.
BIOL 453	Ecophysiology of Global Change	3 Units	Global change is an emerging threat to human health and economic stability. Rapid changes in climate, land use, and prevalence of non-native species generate novel conditions outside the range of typical conditions under which organisms evolved. Already we are witnessing the global redistribution of plants and animals, changes in the timing of critical life cycle events, and in some cases local extinction of populations. This course explores the impacts of global change on biological systems at levels from individuals to ecosystems; among animals, plants and microbes; across ecological to evolutionary timescales; and from local to global spatial scales. Throughout, physiology is emphasized as a core driver of biological responses to global change. Traditional lectures will be accompanied by discussions of primary literature articles. The laboratory component will involve the development of an independent project at the University Farm, and dissemination of results through traditional (e.g. written paper) and new (e.g. podcast) media. This class will fulfill a laboratory requirement of the B.A. in Biology. This class will fulfill an additional laboratory requirement of the B.S. in Biology. Offered as BIOL 353 and BIOL 453. Prereq: Graduate Standing.
BIOL 458	Animal Behavior	3 Units	Ultimately the success or failure (i.e., life or death) of any individual animal is determined by its behavior. This course will be an integrative approach emphasizing experimental studies of animal behavior. You will be introduced to state-of-the-art approaches to the study of animal behavior, including neural and hormonal mechanisms, genetic and developmental mechanisms and finally ecological and evolutionary approaches. We will read and discuss examples of current scientific papers, and learn how animal behaviorists conduct observations and experiments. We will feature guest appearances by research scientists studying subjects relevant to animal behavior. Group discussions will be emphasized. This course may be used as a population/ecology subject area elective for the B.A. and B.S. Biology degrees, and one of the elective core courses required for the Neuroscience B.S. degree.  Offered as BIOL 358 and BIOL 458.
BIOL 458L	Animal Behavior Lab	2 Units	This course will be both a foundations course in animal behavior and an introduction to animal behavior research in settings that may include the Cleveland Metroparks Zoo, campus laboratories, and field settings. Students will gain a basic understanding of the evolutionary basis of behavior that will be complemented by examples of current scientific investigations of behavior. Because this is a laboratory course, the bulk of students' time and effort will be spent conducting laboratory exercises focused on animal behavior and an independent research project of animal behavior. Students will have the option to choose their study species and research question(s) based on a list of options provided by the instructor. Project options will vary each year. This course may be used as a Population biology/ecology area elective and qualifies as a laboratory course for the B.A. and B.S. Biology degrees. Offered as BIOL 358L and BIOL 458L. Coreq: BIOL 458.
BIOL 462	Principles of Developmental Biology	3 Units	The descriptive and experimental aspects of animal development. Gametogenesis, fertilization, cleavage, morphogenesis, induction, differentiation, organogenesis, growth, and regeneration.  Students taking the graduate-level course will prepare an NIH-format research proposal as the required term paper. Offered as BIOL 362, BIOL 462 and ANAT 462.
BIOL 464	Research Methods in Evolutionary Biology	3 Units	The process of evolution explains not only how the present diversity of life on earth has formed, but also provides insights into current pressing issues today, including the spread of antibiotic resistance, the causes of geographic variation in genetic diseases, and explanations for modern patterns of extinction risk.  Students in Research Methods in Evolutionary Biology will be introduced to several of the major research approaches of evolutionary biology, including methods of measuring natural selection on the phenotypic and genotypic levels, quantifying the rate of evolution, reconstructing evolutionary relationships, and assessing the factors that affect rates of speciation and extinction.  The course will consist of a combination of interactive lectures, in-class problem solving and data analysis, and the discussion of peer-reviewed scientific papers.  Grades are based on participation in class, discussions and written summaries of published papers, in-class presentations, and two writing assignments. Offered as BIOL 364 and BIOL 464. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: BIOL 214, BIOL 216, BIOL 251.
BIOL 465	Evo-Devo:Evolution of Body Plans and Pathologies	3 Units	This discussion-based course offers a detailed introduction to Evolutionary Developmental Biology. The field seeks to explain evolutionary events through the mechanisms of Developmental Biology and Medical Genetics. The course is structured into different modules. First we will look at the developmental genetic mechanisms that can cause variation and medical pathologies. Then we focus on how alterations of these mechanisms can  generate novel structural changes.  We will then examine a few areas of active debate, where Evo-Devo is attempting to solve major problems in evolutionary biology and congenital birth defects. We will conclude with two writing assignments. Students will be required to present, read, and discuss primary literature in each module. This course is offered as a SAGES Departmental Seminar and fulfills a Cell and Molecular breadth requirement of the BA and BS in Biology.  Offered as BIOL 365 and BIOL 465. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
BIOL 467	Biorobotics Team Research	3 Units	Many exciting research opportunities cross disciplinary lines. To participate in such projects, researchers must operate in multi-disciplinary teams. The Biorobotics Team Research course offers a unique capstone opportunity for undergraduate students to utilize skills they developed during their undergraduate experience while acquiring new teaming skills. A group of eight students form a research team under the direction of two faculty leaders. Team members are chosen from appropriate majors through interviews with the faculty. They will research a biological mechanism or principle and develop a robotic device that captures the actions of that mechanism. Although each student will cooperate on the team, they each have a specific role, and must develop a final paper that describes the research generated on their aspect of the project. Students meet for one class period per week and two 2-hour lab periods. Initially students brainstorm ideas and identify the project to be pursued. They then acquire biological data and generate robotic designs. Both are further developed during team meetings and reports. Final oral reports and a demonstration of the robotic device occur in week 15. Offered as BIOL 377, EMAE 377, BIOL 467, and EMAE 477. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
BIOL 468	Topics in Evolutionary Biology	3 Units	The focus for this course on a special topic of interest in evolutionary biology will vary from one offering to the next. Examples of possible topics include theories of speciation, the evolution of language, the evolution of sex, evolution and biodiversity, molecular evolution. ANAT/ANTH/EEPS/PHIL/PHOL 467/BIOL 468 will require a longer, more sophisticated term paper, and additional class presentation. Offered as ANTH 367, BIOL 368, EEPS 367, PHIL 367, ANAT 467, ANTH 467, BIOL 468, EEPS 467, PHIL 467 and PHOL 467.
BIOL 471	Foundations of Advanced Ecology	3 Units	Advanced ecology, including discussion of the classic literature, in-depth study of key terms and concepts, applications of these foundational ideas to the modern literature, and current and future directions in the field.  Intended for graduate students who have already taken undergraduate ecology (BIOL 351/451 or equivalent). Prereq: Graduate standing.
BIOL 472	Foundations of Advanced Evolution	3 Units	Advanced evolutionary biology, including discussion of the classic literature, in-depth study of key terms and concepts, applications of these foundational ideas to the modern literature, and current and future directions in the field. Intended for graduate students who have already taken undergraduate evolution. Prereq: Graduate standing.
BIOL 473	Introduction to Neurobiology	3 Units	How nervous systems control behavior. Biophysical, biochemical and molecular biological properties of nerve cells, their organization into circuitry, and their function within networks. Emphasis on quantitative methods for modeling neurons and networks, and on critical analysis of the contemporary technical  literature in the neurosciences. Term paper required for graduate students. This course satisfies a lab requirement for the B.A. in Biology, and a Quantitative Laboratory requirements for the B.S. in Biology. Offered as BIOL 373, BIOL 473, and NEUR 473.
BIOL 474	Neurobiology of Behavior	3 Units	In this course, students will examine how neurobiologists interested in animal behavior study the linkage between neural circuitry and complex behavior.  Various vertebrate and invertebrate systems will be considered.  Several exercises will be used in this endeavor.  Although some lectures will provide background and context on specific neural systems, the emphasis of the course will be on classroom discussion of specific journal articles. In addition, students will each complete a project in which they will observe some animal behavior and generate both behavioral and neurobiological hypotheses related to it.  In lieu of examinations, students will complete three written assignments, including a theoretical grant proposal, a one-page Specific Aims paper related to the project, and a final project paper.  These assignments are designed to give each student experience in writing biologically-relevant documents.  Classroom discussions will help students understand the content and format of each type document.  They will also present their projects orally to the entire class.  Offered as BIOL 374, BIOL 474 and NEUR 474. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
BIOL 478	Computational Neuroscience	3 Units	Computer simulations and mathematical analysis of neurons and neural circuits, and the computational properties of nervous systems.  Students are taught a range of models for neurons and neural circuits, and are asked to implement and explore the computational and dynamic properties of these models.  The course introduces students to dynamical systems theory for the analysis of neurons and neural learning, models of brain systems, and their relationship to artificial and neural networks.  Term project required.  Students enrolled in MATH 478 will make arrangements with the instructor to attend additional lectures and complete additional assignments addressing mathematical topics related to the course.   Recommended preparation: MATH 223 and MATH 224 or BIOL 300 and BIOL 306. Offered as BIOL 378, COGS 378, MATH 378, BIOL 478, CSDS 478, EBME 478, ECSE 478, MATH 478 and NEUR 478.
BIOL 479	Transformative Animal Models in Modern Biology	3 Units	Animal models are extremely important in the study of biology and in modern medicine. They allow us to determine fundamental biological mechanisms and cellular and molecular causes of disease. There is logic to how each animal model has found its place in the menagerie of accepted animal models. Certain animal models allow us to test particular hypotheses that may not be possible to address in other animals. Moreover, some animal models are more relevant than others to studying a particular human disease.  This seminar-based course will focus on animal models that either are effective at modeling human disease, approach relevant neurobiological questions, or play a role in translational medicine. The course will focus on mammalian and non-mammalian animal models that are important to biomedical research, including the primate, mouse, zebrafish, and roundworm. Comparisons between popular animal models will be made. This course satisfies the Organismal breadth requirement of the B.A. and B.S. in Biology.  Offered as BIOL 379 and BIOL 479. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: Graduate Standing.
BIOL 480	Physiology of Organ Systems	4 Units	Our intent is to expand the course from the current 3 hours per week (1.5 hour on Monday and Wednesday) to 4 hours per week (1.5 hours on Monday and Wednesday plus 1 hour on Friday).  Muscle structure and Function, Myasthenia gravis and Sarcopenia; Central Nervous System, (Synaptic Transmission, Sensory System, Autonomic Nervous System, CNS circuits, Motor System, Neurodegenerative Diseases, Paraplegia and Nerve Compression); Cardiovascular Physiology (Regulation of Pressure and flow; Circulation, Cardiac Cycle, Electrophysiology, Cardiac Function, Control of Cardiovascular function, Hypertension); Hemorragy, Cardiac Hypertrophy and Fibrillation; Respiration Physiology (Gas Transport and Exchange, Control of Breathing, Acid/base regulation, Cor Pulmonaris and Cystic Fibrosis, Sleeping apnea and Emphysema); Renal Physiology (Glomerular Filtration, Tubular Function/transport, Glomerulonephritis, Tubulopaties); Gastro-Intestinal Physiology (Gastric motility, gastric function, pancreas and bile function, digestion and absorption, Liver Physiology; Pancreatitis, Liver Disease and cirrhosis); Endocrine Physiology (Thyroid, Adrenal glands, endocrine pancreas, Parathyroid, calcium sensing receptor, Cushing and diabetes, Reproductive hormones, eclampsia); Integrative Physiology (Response to exercise, fasting and feeding, aging).  For all the classes, the students will receive a series of learning objectives by the instructor to help the students address and focus their attention to the key aspects of the organ physiology (and physiopathology).  The evaluation of the students will continue to be based upon the students' participation in class (60% of the grade) complemented by a mid-term and a final exam (each one accounting for 20% of the final grade). Offered as BIOL 480 and PHOL 480.
BIOL 481	Nervous System Development	3 Units	This course will introduce the principles guiding the development of the nervous system. Students will learn molecular mechanisms governing the formation of vertebrate and invertebrate nervous systems and become versed on pioneering research studies leading to major discoveries in the field. This course fulfills the neurobiology core requirement for the B.S. in Neuroscience and the organismal breadth requirement of the B.A. and B.S. in Biology. Offered as BIOL 381 and BIOL 481.
BIOL 491	Contemporary Biology and Biotechnology for Innovation I	3 Units	The first half of a two-semester sequence providing an understanding of biology as a basis for successfully launching new high-tech ventures. The course will examine physical limitations to present technologies and the use of biology to identify potential opportunities for new venture creation. The course will provide experience in using biology in both identification of incremental improvements and as the basis for alternative technologies. Case studies will be used to illustrate recent commercially successful (and unsuccessful) biotechnology-based venture creation and will illustrate characteristics for success.
BIOL 492	Contemporary Biology and Biotechnology for Innovation II	3 Units	Continuation of BIOL 491 with an emphasis on current and prospective opportunities for Biotechnology Entrepreneurship. Longer term opportunities for Biotechnology Entrepreneurship in emerging areas including (but not limited to) applications of DNA sequence information in medicine and agriculture; energy and the environment; biologically-inspired robots. Recommended preparation: BIOL 491 or consent of department.
BIOL 495	Introduction to Graduate School in the Biological Sciences	1 Unit	This course will help incoming Biology MS and Ph.D. students navigate their way through graduate school and participate in the scientific process.  Students in the Biology graduate program will be strongly encouraged to take this course in their first year.  This will be a skill-based course that will become part of their academic toolbox. In addition, there will be sessions to offer general tips for life in graduate school. Prereq: Graduate Standing.
BIOL 498	Modern Human Biological Variation	3 Units	The objectives of this course are to provide students with an introduction to human biological variation and to understand the variation within an evolutionary framework through lecture, readings, discussion, and labs. We will examine the patterns of morphological and genetic variation in modern human populations and discuss the evolutionary explanations for the observed patterns. In order to do this, we will first build a solid foundation in the scientific method, population genetics, and evolutionary theory before exploring the adaptive significance of the observed variation. A major component of the class will be the discussion of the social and health implications of these patterns of biological variation, particularly in the construction and application of the concept of race and its use in medicine. There are three units to the course.  Unit 1 focuses on the fundamentals to understanding biological variation, we will cover basic population genetics, evolution, and the human fossil record.  Unit 2 concentrates on surveying modern human biological variation, examining both morphological and genetic traits, and why these variations exist.  Unit 3 examines how race is constructed using population-based biological differences, its validity, and the implications for health and medicine. This course fulfills the Population and Ecology breadth requirement of the B.A. and B.S. in Biology. Offered as BIOL 398 and BIOL 498. Prereq: Graduate Standing.
BIOL 599	Advanced Independent Study for Graduate Students	1 - 3 Units	Independent study of advanced topics in biology under the supervision of a biology faculty member. Registration requires submission of a proposal for a project or study and approval of the department.
BIOL 601	Research	1 - 9 Units	
BIOL 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
BIOL 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
WASH 2A	Washington Center Internship	9 Units	Credit for semester-length internship experience taken as part of the Washington Center Program during Fall or Spring terms.
WASH 2B	Washington Center - Politics and Public Policy Course	3 Units	Credit for the Politics and Public Policy course taken as part of the Washington Center Program.
WASH 2C	Washington Center - Portfolio	3 Units	Credit for the student's portfolio taken as part of the Washington Center Program.
WASH 2D	Washington Center Summer Internship	3 Units	Credit for semester-length internship experience taken as part of the Washington Center Program during Summer term.
WGST 124	Sex and the City: Gender and Urban History	3 Units	Gender is an identity and an experience written onto the spaces of the city. The urban landscape--with its streets, buildings, bridges, parks and squares--shapes and reflects gender identities and sexual relations. This course examines the relationship between gender and urban space from the 19th century to the present, giving special attention to the city of Cleveland. Using Cleveland as our case study, this course will explore some of the many ways in which cities and the inhabitants of cities have been historically sexed, gendered, and sexualized. We will explore the ways in which gender was reflected and constructed by the built environment, as well as how urban space and urban life shaped gender and sexual identities. The course is organized thematically and explores different aspects of city life such as prostitution, urban crime, labor, politics, urban renewal and decay, consumption and leisure and the ways in which sex and gender intersects with these issues. Offered as HSTY 124 and WGST 124.
WGST 201	Introduction to Gender Studies	3 Units	This course introduces women and men students to the methods and concepts of gender studies, women's studies, and feminist theory.  An interdisciplinary course, it covers approaches used in literary criticism, history, philosophy, political science, sociology, anthropology, psychology, film studies, cultural studies, art history, and religion.  It is the required introductory course for students taking the women's and gender studies major. Offered as ENGL 270, HSTY 270, PHIL 270, RLGN 270, SOCI 201, and WGST 201. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
WGST 219	Islam in America	3 Units	The United States is home to one of the most diverse Muslim communities in the world. Using a variety of primary and secondary sources, this course examines the rich history of Islam in the United States, from the 18th century to the present, as it relates to key moments within American politics, religion and culture, and to transnational developments in Islamic thought and practice. We will also explore important issues within contemporary Muslim communities, including gender, shari'a, and religious pluralism. In addition to studying the experiences of Muslim immigrants, students will also investigate the vital role of African-American Muslims and converts in the development of American Muslim institutions, beliefs and rituals. This course will also introduce students to the history of Islam in Cleveland, and provide them with the opportunity to contribute to original research on Muslim communities in our city. Offered as AFST 219, HSTY 279, RLGN 219, and WGST 219. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 227	Women, Gender, and Islam	3 Units	Women and gender are central to understanding Muslim societies, past and present. From debates about the veil to the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, gendered concerns have been especially prominent in contemporary debates about the status of Islam in the modern world. How have Muslim thinkers interpreted Islamic scriptures with respect to topics such as marriage, child custody, inheritance, and sexuality? How is masculinity and femininity constructed? In what ways do their interpretations reflect the political, economic, and social conditions in which they lived? How does gender structure authority and power in Muslim communities? How and why have Muslim women become so important in contemporary debates over religious and national identity around the world?   This course begins by examining the position of women and gender in the foundational Islamic texts, the Qur'an and Sunna (the practice of the Prophet Muhammad), and pre-modern interpretations of them.  Then we will explore marriage and divorce in Muslim jurisprudence, in order to examine themes such as women's spiritual capacities, female leadership, sexuality, and slavery. Next, we will turn to the headscarf as a lens though which to explore modern configurations of gender and sexuality, as they intersect with conceptions of national belonging, religious identity, and individual freedom. Finally, we will study contemporary debates over polygyny, homosexuality, and female religious authority.  There are no prerequisites for this course. No prior knowledge of Islam is expected. Offered as RLGN 227 and WGST 227. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 228	Sociology of Sexuality	3 Units	This course analyzes the issues of sex and sexuality from a sociological point of view.  It is centered on the notion that what we consider to be 'normal' or 'natural' about sex and sexuality is, in reality, socially constructed.  One's viewpoint on the issues surrounding sexuality are influenced by the social context in which they live, as opposed to the purely biological viewpoint that presupposes some sense of normalcy or naturalness regarding sexual relations.  A range of topics will be covered, including readings that discuss the variations of sexuality and the notions of sexual ''deviance" in order to explore the cultural and societal variation that exists along the lines of gender, race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, age and disability. Offered as SOCI 228 and WGST 228.
WGST 239	International Comparative Family Policy	3 Units	This course focuses on the connections between public policies and families and the values that enter into policy debates and family choices. It provides conceptual frameworks that can be used to identify and understand some of the influences underlying policy choices affecting families and also frameworks for evaluating the consequences of these choices for families of diverse structures, socio-economic statuses, and racial and ethnic backgrounds. We will apply this framework to topics such as maternity leave, child care, income assistance, and marriage promotion.  We will compare U.S. policies to those of other industrialized countries, especially those in Italy. You will end the semester by conducting research on a social policy topic that we have not covered during the semester from understanding the initial social problem all the way through to making a policy recommendation to help you learn to explore a new topic independently. Central to the course are the intersections between families and governments via policy outputs, and the roles that citizens and family professionals can play in improving them.  Using UNICEF resources, located in Florence, Italy, we will delve into evidence-based approaches for ameliorating suffering in young families across the globe. Using Florence as a classroom, we will explore differences in family life between the U.S. and Italy as a means to understand the ways in which the state must respond to differing cultures and needs. At the Innocenti Museum, in the same building as UNICEF's research offices, we will see an orphanage that began operations in 1445 and functioned as an orphanage and hospital until 1875, making it the oldest public institution in Italy. The building has been dedicated to the protection of children's rights and education since that time, and provides a backdrop for an early understanding of ways to think about family policy.  Offered as SOCI 239 and WGST 239. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 252	Soul Murder: Religion and Sexual Abuse	3 Units	This seminar traces anthropological questions about religious-trauma, -memory, and -suffering through the lens of clergy sexual abuse. How is religious sexual abuse different than non-religious contexts? What can survivors teach us about the resilience of the human spirit? What are the racial dynamics of the recent Roman Catholic crisis? What flaws has it exposed in our criminal justice system?  To answer questions like these, we will (i) begin the semester with anthropological studies of religion and trauma. Then we will (ii) examine grand jury investigations in the United States. Prepared by these theoretical and historical texts, we will (iii) evaluate case studies from the Roman Catholic context, including sexual abuse by nuns. We will use these examples to evaluate (iv) representations of the crisis in film and news media. Finally, we will (v) compare the Catholic crisis to recent sexual abuse scandals in American Jewish, Muslim, and Protestant communities.  The comparative literature will include readings by Veena Das (cultural anthropology), Levinas (philosophy), Kathryn Lofton (religious studies), Timothy Lytton (law), Fortune (theology), and Frawley-O'Dea (psychology). Primary sources will include excerpts from special prosecutors and grand juries in Pennsylvania, Louisiana, and Massachusetts. Films will include "Doubt" and "Spotlight."  By the end of the course, students will: - Know how to research and critique the legal, spiritual, and theoretical consequences of religious sexual abuse. - Be able to debate multiple theories of religion and trauma. - Be able to analyze data that is emotionally difficult and legally complex.  Our seminars will include discussions, short writing assignments, collaborative work, and presentations. Offered as RLGN 252 and WGST 252. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 257	Women's Histories in South Asia	3 Units	This course traces the history of women in South Asia from pre-colonial times to the present. Themes explored in the course will include (but not be limited to): the historical transformations of institutions shaping women's lives such as state, family, religious and legal traditions; the impact of colonialism, nationalism, and decolonization on women, as well as the history of women's movements in various parts of South Asia. As we acquaint ourselves with the vibrant historiography on women in South Asia, we will also examine the theoretical and methodological challenges involved in writing histories using the analytical lens of gender. While a significant portion of the readings will focus on South Asia, we will occasionally bring in insights from histories of women in other parts of the world to help develop comparative perspectives and evaluate the South Asian cases and examples within the broader field of women's history. Offered as HSTY 157 and WGST 257. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 268	Women in the Bible: Ethnographic Approaches to Rite and Ritual, Story, Song, and Art	3 Units	Examination of women in Jewish and Christian Biblical texts, along with their Jewish, Christian (and occasionally Muslim) interpretations. Discussion of how these traditions have shaped images of, and attitudes toward, women in western civilization. Offered as RLGN 268, WGST 268, and JDST 268.
WGST 273	Race and Gender in Popular Culture	3 Units	This course explores how notions of race and gender have been constructed, reflected and contested through American popular culture from the nineteenth century to the present. A special focus will be given to the reciprocal relationship between culture, politics and the economy, and the ways in which class, gendered, and racial identities reflected and shaped them. We will examine how different forms of popular culture, broadly defined as both cultural artifacts and as cultural practices provide us with new types of historical sources and how historians are using them to rethink historical questions such as labor struggles, empire, immigration, and democracy. Readings includes both primary and secondary documents and topics are organized chronology. In considering the multifaceted aspects of popular culture, we will examine how it became a useful prism to shape, express and influence notions of gender, sexuality, and race. Offered as HSTY 273 and WGST 273. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 302	The Lemonade Class: Religion, Race, Sex and Black Music	3 Units	Charles Long suggests that black musical forms are creative responses to the particular circumstances of black peoples' presence in the U.S and black notions of the sacred. In April of 2016, Beyoncé released her visual album Lemonade two days after the death of Prince. This course is organized around the album's title cuts and links these two artists together in an examination of religion and musical performance as creative response to the racial and gendered conditions of black life. The course investigates how both artists have used music as a platform to explore issues of race, gender, commerce, sexuality, power and divinity. The course also looks at examples from the works of earlier artists who address similar themes such as Ma Rainey, Bessie Smith, Muddy Waters, Billie Holiday, Nina Simone, Little Richard, James Brown, Marvin Gaye, and Aretha Franklin. Offered as AFST 302, ETHS 302, MUHI 316, RLGN 302, RLGN 402, and WGST 302. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 308	Immigration and the Paris Experience	3 Units	Three-week immersion learning experience living and studying in Paris. The focus of the course is the culture, literature, and the arts of the African, Arab, and Asian communities of Paris. At least half of the course looks at issues surrounding immigration that affect women in particular. Students spend a minimum of fifteen hours per week visiting cultural centers and museums and interviewing authors and students about the immigrant experience. Assigned readings complement course activities. Students enrolled in FRCH 308/408 do coursework in French. WLIT 308/408, ETHS 308, and WGST 308 students have the option of completing coursework in English. Graduate students have additional course requirements. Offered as FRCH 308, WLIT 308, ETHS 308, WGST 308, FRCH 408, and WLIT 408. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 314	Innovation and French Science	Past, Present, and Future	3 Units	The French scientific enterprise over the past 250 years has been buffeted by politics, war, civil unrest, and economic and societal changes.  This study abroad course examines the evolution of science in France in light of these influences, how women have play an outsized role relative to the U.S., and the centrality of the French to humanity's scientific endeavor over the centuries. Students will visit many important scientific venues, both historical and modern, around Paris and elsewhere in the country.  Readings from a variety of sources -- scientific, literary, historical -- and informal meetings with French scientists, engineers, and students will provide a comprehensive portrait of French science and scientific history from a variety of perspectives.  The course will be conducted in English, although there is ample opportunity to interact in French if the student desires.  The course meets the CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement and may meet breadth requirements in certain programs.  Not available for credit to students who have completed FRCH 328/428, PHYS 333, WGST 333, or WLIT 353/453. Offered as CHEM 314, HSTY 314, PHYS 314, and WGST 314. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 315A	International Bioethics Policy and Practice: Women's Health in the Netherlands	3 Units	This 3-credit course allows students to familiarize themselves with social policies and practices related to women's health in the United States and the Netherlands.  Issues covered in the course include birth control and family planning, abortion, prenatal testing, childbirth, health care disparities, cosmetic surgery, prostitution and trafficking in women.  This course also addresses the US and Dutch national policies regarding the public provision of health care for women.  The course places an emphasis on the ways in which social norms shape policies over time, which political actors are involved in shaping women's health policy, and the balance between women's health as a matter of the public good or individual responsibility.  This course substantively explores gender-specific cultural values and practices in relation to women's health in the United States and the Netherlands and will help students develop the analytical skills necessary for evaluating social policy and ethical issues related to women's health. Offered as BETH 315A, BETH 415A and WGST 315A. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 318	History of Black Women in the U.S.	3 Units	Chronologically arranged around specific issues in black women's history organizations, participation in community and political movements, labor experiences, and expressive culture. The course will use a variety of materials, including autobiography, literature, music, and film. Offered as AFST 318, ETHS 318, HSTY 318, and WGST 318.
WGST 325	Philosophy of Feminism	3 Units	Dimensions of gender difference. Definition of feminism. Critical examination of feminist critiques of culture, including especially politics, ideology, epistemology, ethics, and psychology. Readings from traditional and contemporary sources.  Offered as PHIL 325, PHIL 425 and WGST 325. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: PHIL 101.
WGST 326	Gender, Inequality, and Globalization	3 Units	Using a sociological perspective, this course examines how major societal institutions, including the economy, polity, medicine, religion, education and family, are structured to reproduce gendered inequalities across the globe. Attention is given to the intersections of race/ethnicity, social class, gender and sexuality in social systems of power and privilege. Of critical importance is how gender figures in the relationship between Economic North and Economic South countries. We will elucidate how gender norms vary by culture and exert profound influence on the daily, lived experiences of women and men. The course will be informed by recent scholarship on feminism, women's movements, and globalization. Offered as SOCI 326 and WGST 326. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SOCI 101 or permission of program director.
WGST 333	Science and Technology in France	3 Units	This course is an exploration of the development of science and technology in France, from their rise in the 18th and 19th centuries to their recent renaissance, from both a scientific and a humanities perspective. A significant component will focus on the contributions of women to science in France. Site visits in France will include the Marie Curie laboratory, the Pasteur Institute, and the Museum of Natural History. Readings will come from the fields of history of science, French cultural history, and French literature. Offered as FRCH 328, FRCH 428, WGST 333, WLIT 353 and WLIT 453. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 337	Women in the Arab World	3 Units	The purpose of this course is twofold: It is a course that allows students an in-depth look at the diverse women who represent a number of cultures in the Arab world in nations from the Mashrek to the Maghreb. The second primary goal of the course is to study such women through the eyes of leading Arab women theorists who have made an impact not only in their own countries, but also on disciplines intersecting with women's studies worldwide. We will study the Arab woman's place in her respective society, in political and economic systems, in education, and in the family. We will also analyze her contributions to art and literature as well as to the sciences. The course will provide an overview of the Arab woman throughout history, from her origins to her place within recent movements within the Arab Spring and other current world events. As Arab women are Muslim, Christian, and Jewish, views of women within these major world religions will also be taken into account as we study the Arab woman as well as religion's impact on culture in the Middle East and in the Maghreb in particular. In the course, we will utilize theoretical texts, but also case studies as well as examples from media and the arts. During the semester, we will take advantage of teleconferencing opportunities between CWRU and two major academic units for Women's Studies in the Arab world: The Institute for Women's Studies in the Arab World (IWSAW) in Beirut, Lebanon, and the University of Jordan's Center for Women's Studies in Amman. Offered as FRCH 337, FRCH 437, ARAB 337, ETHS 337 and WGST 337. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 342	Latin American Feminist Voices	3 Units	Examination of the awakening of feminine and feminist consciousness in the literary production of Latin American women writers, particularly from the 1920s to the present.  Close attention paid to the dominant themes of love and dependency; imagination as evasion; alienation and rebellion; sexuality and power; the search for identity and the self-preservation of subjectivity.  Readings include prose, poetry, and dramatic texts of female Latin American writers contributing to the emerging of feminist ideologies and the mapping of feminist identities. Offered as SPAN 342, SPAN 442, ETHS 342, and WGST 342. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 345	Topics in LGBTQ Studies	3 Units	This course will focus on selected topics in the study of LGBTQ literature, film, theory, and culture. Individual courses may focus on such topics as queer theory, LGBTQ literature, queer cinema, gay and lesbian poetry, LGBTQ graphic novels, the AIDS memoir, AIDS/Gay Drama, and queer rhetoric and protest. Maximum 6 credits.  Offered as ENGL 345, ENGL 445 and WGST 345. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
WGST 346	Women, Power, and Politics	3 Units	Women, Power, and Politics involves a critical examination of the impact of gender on the forms and distributions of power and politics, with primary reference to the experience of women in the United States.  Major concerns of the course include the political meanings and import of "sex," "gender," and "politics;" the relationship between women and the state; how women organize collectively to influence state policies; and how the state facilitates and constrains women's access to and exercise of political power.  The course is organized around four foci central to the study of women and politics.  The first section of the course focuses on the meanings of "women," "gender," and "politics."  In this section, we will consider how these concepts intersect and the ways in which each may be used to deepen our understanding of the workings of governments and political systems, and of women's relative political powerlessness.  The second section of the course employs these concepts to understand the (re) emergence of the US feminist movement, its meanings, practices, and goals, and its transformation across US political history.  In the third section, we turn to conventional electoral politics, focusing on women's candidacies, their campaigns, and women's voting behavior.  In the final section of the course, we consider those general factors that might provide for increased gender equality and improved life status for women, in global, comparative perspective. Offered as POSC 346, POSC 446 and WGST 346. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
WGST 349	The Arab World Experience	3 Units	Taught and led by Case faculty, The Arab World Experience is a spring semester course with a spring break study abroad component in a Middle Eastern or North African country supplemented by course meetings before and after travel. It will rotate among countries such as Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, etc. and be taught by faculty with appropriate area expertise in Arabic, Women's and Gender Studies, and/or Ethnic Studies. The course focuses on topics such as history, politics, culture, and gender relations within the society of study. Workload and learning outcomes are commensurate with a semester-long three credit hour course. Guest lectures in the host country are an important component of the course as they bring a fresh, authentic perspective to the aforementioned topics discussed. There will be three three-hour meetings prior to travel, required reading, and one three-hour meeting after travel. In the host country, students will spend seven days (five-eight hours per day) in seminars, discussions, and site visits. Student grades are determined on the basis of participation, attendance, a daily experiential learning journal, interviews with guest speakers, and a final exam. Offered as ARAB 349, ETHS 349 and WGST 349. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 352	African Feminisms	3 Units	This course traces the history of African feminism from its origins within traditions through to a more contemporary theoretical analysis of gender, marriage, and motherhood seen from a Afrocentric perspective.  Approaches studied are those that pertain to anthropology, history, literature, sociology, and culture. African feminist theory of scholars such as Filomina Steady, Cheikh Anta Diop, Buchi Emecheta, Ifi Amadiume, Obioma Nnameka, Oyeronko Oyewumi, and Calixthe Beyala will be studied and there will be some comparative analysis of Western theories to show how African feminisms are clearly distinct. Theories on these feminisms will be presented, and in the process, students will look at cases of women in Cameroon, Nigeria, Ghana, Kenya, and Senegal.  It is commonly believed that African women were defined for a long time according to constructs of Western anthropology.  This course will thus look at social institutions such as woman-to-woman marriage, matriarchy, and various women's rituals in order to identify African constructs of gender, family, kinship, marriage, and motherhood. Offered as ETHS 352 and WGST 352. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 353	Women in American History I	3 Units	The images and realities of women's social, political, and economic lives in early America. Uses primary documents and biographers to observe individuals and groups of women in relation to legal, religious, and social restrictions. Offered as HSTY 353, WGST 353, and HSTY 453. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 354	Women in American History II	3 Units	With HSTY 353, forms a two-semester introduction to women's studies. The politics of suffrage and the modern woman's efforts to balance marriage, motherhood, and career. (HSTY 353 not a prerequisite.) Offered as HSTY 354, WGST 354, and HSTY 454. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 355	Hindu and Jain Bioethics: Special Focus on Women's and Gender Studies	3 Units	This course will provide both an introduction to basic Hinduism and Jainism and an introduction to Hindu and Jain bioethics. We will focus primarily on bioethical issues that pertain to women and that are gender related. These issues include abortion, menstruation, surrogacy, intersex, and other topics of controversy.  Offered as ETHS 353, RLGN 353, RLGN 453, and WGST 355. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 360	Global Politics of Reproduction	3 Units	This course offers an anthropological examination of reproductive politics around the world. It explores historical, cultural, socioeconomic, political, and technological factors contributing to reproductive activities. After introducing the anthropological approaches to the study of reproduction, the course will delve into the ways to regulate reproduction in historical and contemporary times, various factors contributing to fertility change, state intervention in reproduction, and assisted reproductive technologies.  Offered as ANTH 360, ANTH 460, and WGST 360. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 363	Gender and Sexuality in America	3 Units	This multicultural seminar uses a mixture of historical text, gender theory, personal biography, and artistic expression to explore changing notions of gender and sexuality over the past two centuries in the United States. Offered as HSTY 363, HSTY 463 and WGST 363. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 365	Gender and Sex Differences: Cross-cultural Perspective	3 Units	Gender roles and sex differences throughout the life cycle considered from a cross-cultural perspective. Major approaches to explaining sex roles discussed in light of information from both Western and non-Western cultures.  Offered as ANTH 365, ANTH 465 and WGST 365.
WGST 370	Navigating Gender in Organizations	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to prepare students to succeed in the workforce by understanding and exploring the opportunities and challenges of work across the lifespan and developing necessary skills to be effective. The course broadens understanding of gender dynamics and gendered structures in the workplace, intersections of gender with other identities, and the leadership and managerial issues affecting women and men in work organizations.  The course helps students create a personal framework for how to develop a successful, happy and integrated work life in the global economy. Offered as ORBH 370 and WGST 370. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 372	Work and Family: U.S. and Abroad	3 Units	Covers the impact on human lives of the interface between work and family; the different ways gender structures the experience of work and family depending upon racial and ethnic background, social class, age, and partner preference; the impact of historical context on work-family experiences; work-family policies in the United States and other countries. Offered as SOCI 372, WGST 372, and SOCI 472.
WGST 373	Women and Medicine in the United States	3 Units	Students in this seminar will investigate the experiences of American women as practitioners and as patients.  We will meet weekly in the Dittrick Medical Museum for discussion of texts and use artifacts from the museum's collection.  After a unit exploring how the female body was viewed by medical theorists from the Galenic period to the nineteenth-century, we will look at midwives, college-trained female doctors and nurses, and health advocacy among poor populations.  We will then look at women's experiences in terms of menstruation, childbearing, and menopause, before exploring the cultural relationship between women and psychological disorders. Offered as HSTY 373, HSTY 473, and WGST 373. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WGST 374	American Women's Poetry	3 Units	This course surveys American women's poetry from the seventeenth century to the present. We will read a range of poetry illustrating the roles of women poets in the development of the nation's literary, cultural, and social history. We will pay close attention to how women poets use traditional and innovative poetic forms to represent lived experiences and to engage the political realities of their varying historical moments Offered as ENGL 373, ENGL 473, and WGST 374. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
WGST 384	Sociology of Sex(es), Gender(s) and Sexuality(ies)	3 Units	Gender is an organizing principle of society and affects every element of social life. Ideas about gender and sexuality shape identity and suffuse interactions, institutions and the societies within which we live. These ideas vary from individual to individual, but also across time and place. This course surveys research on sex, gender and sexuality with the goal of providing students with a theoretical grounding for analyzing sex, gender and sexuality from a sociological perspective. We will explore outdated theories like essentialism and biological determinism, and newer theories rooted in social constructionism. Central to this course is intersectionality, a theoretical perspective that reveals ways in which race/ethnicity, class, gender, sexuality and other social categories are inextricably connected and form interlocking systems of inequality. Additional topics to be explored include: the sexual revolution, the hook-up culture, gendered families, gendered health, occupational segregation, sexual harassment and gendered violence, reproduction, social change and feminist activism. Offered as SOCI 384, SOCI 484, and WGST 384. Prereq: SOCI 101.
WGST 396	SAGES Capstone	3 Units	Capstone experience in the fields of Women's and Gender Studies for an in-depth, independent project of particular interest to the student. Students are strongly encouraged to work with a WGST program faculty member, but some projects may be supervised by faculty in other areas or by other qualified professionals. All capstones require a WGST faculty advisor's approval of the proposal prior to registration. Open to juniors and seniors majoring in Women's and Gender Studies. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: WGST 201; Junior or Senior standing with major/minor in WGST.
WGST 399	Independent Study	1 - 3 Units	Independent research project in the fields of Women's and Gender Studies. Project proposals must be approved by a WGST faculty advisor. Students are strongly encouraged to work with a WGST program faculty member, but some projects may be supervised by faculty in other areas for by other qualified professionals with a WGST faculty advisor's approval. Credit varies with the scope and depth of the project. Prereq: WGST 201.
WLIT 154	Introducing Hinduism	3 Units	This "topics" course offers an introduction to the academic study of Hinduism. Whether approached through a particular theme or as a general historical introduction, each section of this course provides students with a general introduction to the academic study of religion and basic religious literacy in Hinduism, exploring forms of it in a diversity of cultural contexts. Section topics could include, but are not limited to:  The Epics, Ritual, Contemporary Practices.  Students may repeat the course for credit (up to 6 credits), provided that the two sections are different. Offered as RLGN 154 and WLIT 154. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 201	Greek Prose Authors	3 Units	Readings from authors such as Plato, Lysias, Xenophon, and Herodotus.  Offered as GREK 201, GREK 401, WLIT 201 and WLIT 401.
WLIT 202	Introduction to Greek Poetry	3 Units	Primarily readings from Homer, Hesiod, and Theocritus. Selections from Greek lyric may be introduced at the instructor's discretion.   Offered as GREK 202, GREK 402, WLIT 202, and WLIT 402.
WLIT 203	Gods and Heroes in Greek Literature	3 Units	This course examines major works of Greek literature and sets them in their historical and cultural context. Constant themes are war, wandering, tyranny, freedom, community, family, and the role of men and women within the household and the ancient city-state. Parallels with modern life and politics will be explored. Lectures and discussions. Offered as CLSC 203 and WLIT 203. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 204	Heroes and Hustlers in Roman Literature	3 Units	This course constitutes the second half of a sequence on Classical literature.  Its main themes are heroism vs. self-promotion, love vs. lust, and the struggle between democracy and tyranny.  These topics are traced in a variety of literary genres from the period of the Roman republic well into the empire.  Parallels with modern life and politics will be drawn. Offered as CLSC 204 and WLIT 204. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 205	Readings from the Epic of Gilgamesh	3 Units	In this course, we will read the entire Standard Babylonian recension of the Epic of Gilgamesh, considered the first great work of literature, from the original Akkadian text. While the primary goal of the course will be to become proficient readers of Akkadian, we will take some excursus on topics such as Babylonian religion, whether Gilgamesh was a historical figure or not, how the text was put together, and its possible influence on later heroic traditions such as the Greco-Roman. Offered as AKKD 205, AKKD 405, WLIT 205 and WLIT 405. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: AKKD 101 and AKKD 102.
WLIT 211	World Literature I	3 Units	Survey of literature from antiquity to 1600. May include Western and non-Western texts by Homer, Vergil, Ovid, St. Augustine, Dante, Boccaccio, Rabelais, Cervantes, Sei Shonagon, Basho, and the Baghavad Gita.
WLIT 212	World Literature II	3 Units	Survey of literature from 1600 to present. May include Western and non-Western texts by Swift, Voltaire, Rousseau, Tolstoi, Baudelaire, Austen, Mann, Kafka, Lispector, Marmon Silko, Soyinka.
WLIT 215	The World of Manga	3 Units	Manga (comic books and graphic novels) is one of the most important aspects of contemporary visual culture in Japan. It is consumed by millions of Japanese every day, and has attracted intense attention around the world. As it constitutes one third of the annual publications in Japan today, its breadth and scope are limitless.  What does manga reveal about contemporary cultural production and consumption in Japan? What kind of special features are used in manga to attract people so much? What kind of genres do they have and what kind of readers do they have? These are some of the questions we will explore by surveying a large number of works produced in the last fifty years. Introducing graphic novels by major artists and writers, the course will expand your understanding of key components, social movements and discourses associated with manga. You will examine the history of manga, its aesthetics, and social impact through assigned readings, including scholarly papers and manga books, as well as works selected by each student (in original Japanese or in English translation). Offered as JAPN 215 and WLIT 215. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 224	Sword and Sandal: The Classics in Film	3 Units	Gladiator.  Alexander.  The 300.  Contemporary society's continuing fascination with putting the ancient world on the big screen is undeniable; and yet the causes underlying this phenomenon are not quite so readily apparent.  In this course we will watch and discuss a number of movies about the ancient world, running the gamut from Hollywood classics such as Ben-Hur and Spartacus to more recent treatments (the aforementioned 300 and Gladiator, for starters), and from the mainstream and conventional (Clash of the Titans, Disney's Hercules) to the far-out and avant-garde (Fellini's Satyricon, anyone?).  As we do so we'll learn quite a bit about the art and economics of film, on one hand, and the ancient world, on the other.  And yet what we'll keep coming back to are the big questions: what does our fascination with the ancient Mediterranean tell us about ourselves as a society?  Why do such movies get made, and what kinds of agendas do they serve?  To what extent can we recapture the past accurately?  And if we can't, are we doomed to just endlessly projecting our own concerns and desires onto a screen, and dressing them in togas?  No knowledge of ancient languages is required for this course. Offered as CLSC 224 and WLIT 224.
WLIT 225	Japanese Popular Culture	3 Units	This course highlights salient aspects of modern Japanese popular culture as expressed in animation, comics and literature. The works examined include films by Hayao Miyazaki, writings by Kenji Miyazawa, Haruki Murakami and Banana Yoshimoto, among others. The course introduces students to essential aspects of modern Japanese popular culture and sensibility. Offered as JAPN 225 and WLIT 225. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 232	Vergil	3 Units	Primarily readings from The Aeneid; selections from Vergil's other work may be introduced at instructor's discretion. Recommended preparation: LATN 201 or equivalent.   Offered as LATN 202, LATN 402, WLIT 232 and WLIT 432.
WLIT 241	Latin Prose Authors	3 Units	Reading and discussion of such prose authors as Cicero, Caesar, Livy or Pliny.  Offered as LATN 201, LATN 401, WLIT 241 and WLIT 441. Prereq: LATN 102 or equivalent.
WLIT 245	Classical Japanese Literature in Translation	3 Units	Readings, in English translation, of classical Japanese poetry, essays, narratives, and drama to illustrate essential aspects of Japanese culture and sensibility before the Meiji Restoration (1868). Lectures explore the sociohistorical contexts and the character of major literary genres; discussions focus on interpreting the central images of human value within each period. Japanese sensibilities compared to and contrasted with those of Western and other cultures. Offered as JAPN 245 and WLIT 245. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 255	Modern Japanese Literature in Translation	3 Units	Focus on the major genres of modern Japanese literature, including poetry, short story, and novel (shosetsu). No knowledge of Japanese language or history is assumed. Lectures, readings, and discussions are in English. Films and slides complement course readings. Offered as JAPN 255 and WLIT 255. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 265	Constructing the Samurai: Images of Japanese Warriors from 1100's to the Present	3 Units	From concepts of premodern warriors calling out their names before doing hand-to-hand combat to modern salary men crushing the world with their economic prowess, samurai have come to be an iconic image of the Japanese people. Throughout the semester we will pay particular attention to the central themes in the historiography of warrior society, roughly, the years between ca. 1110 and 1850 C.E. We will investigate how these documents were translated by modern societies, both east and west, in samurai film. Students will explore the category of "samurai" through reading selections from The Tale of the Heike, as well as selected Noh plays, legal documents, travel diaries, autobiographies, short stories, and historical texts. In addition, we will investigate other genres contributing to the construction of the idea of "samurai," such as film.  This seminar will closely examine the concept of "samurai," particularly its connection to the Japanese identity using an interdisciplinary context of the arts, history, religion, and literature. We will also explore the ways in which daimyo (feudal lords), authors, Buddhist officials, and filmmakers throughout the world created, shaped, and altered the ideal image of the samurai. Key to understanding the concept of samurai will be wrestling with questions of authorship, spirit pacification, nationality, and patronage, with specific focus on the Japanese relationship with Western nations and cultures. We will focus on language and its role in legitimizing the global concepts of "samurai" and "bushido." This class will provide additional insight geared toward the cultural study of linguistic identities beyond those informed by the English language and will include terms expressed in Japanese. Many of the resources used in this course will be translated from the Japanese, allowing us to consider Naoki Sakai's theories of enunciation/ translation/ subjectivity, Haruo Shirane's theory of reception, and Michael Emmerich's theory of replacement. Especially important will be to focus on terms in Japanese with no, or poor, English equivalent (such as samurai, shogun, daimyo, bushido, etc.) but with clear images in the English-speaking imagination(s). The instructor will provide background information on political, cultural, and religious history. Class sessions will be conducted in English and combine lectures, discussion, audio-visual materials, and creative as well as analytical writing exercises. All readings and films will be in English or with English subtitle. Offered as JAPN 265 and WLIT 265. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 290	Masterpieces of Continental Fiction	3 Units	Major works of fiction from the 19th century and earlier. Offered as ENGL 290 and WLIT 290.
WLIT 295	The Francophone World	3 Units	The course offers an introduction to the Francophone World from a historical, cultural, and literary perspective. The Francophone World includes countries and regions around the globe with a substantial French-speaking population (and where French is sometimes, but not always, an official language): North America (Louisiana, Quebec, and Acadia); North Africa (Tunisia, Morocco, Algeria, and Egypt); the Middle-East (Lebanon, Syria); the Caribbean (Martinique, Guadeloupe, Haiti); Southeast Asia (Vietnam); and Europe (France, Belgium, Switzerland, and Luxembourg). FRCH 295 provides a comprehensive overview of the Francophone World, while focusing on a particular area or areas in any given semester. Offered as AFST 295, ETHS 295, FRCH 295, and WLIT 295. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 306	Tragedy	3 Units	Reading and interpretation of selected plays of Aeschylus, Euripides, and Sophocles.   Offered as GREK 306, GREK 406, WLIT 306, and WLIT 406.
WLIT 307	History	3 Units	Extensive reading in Thucydides' History of the Peloponnesian War, especially Books VI and VII, the expedition against Syracuse.   Offered as GREK 307, GREK 407, WLIT 307 and WLIT 407. Prereq: GREK 202 or equivalent.
WLIT 308	Immigration and the Paris Experience	3 Units	Three-week immersion learning experience living and studying in Paris. The focus of the course is the culture, literature, and the arts of the African, Arab, and Asian communities of Paris. At least half of the course looks at issues surrounding immigration that affect women in particular. Students spend a minimum of fifteen hours per week visiting cultural centers and museums and interviewing authors and students about the immigrant experience. Assigned readings complement course activities. Students enrolled in FRCH 308/408 do coursework in French. WLIT 308/408, ETHS 308, and WGST 308 students have the option of completing coursework in English. Graduate students have additional course requirements. Offered as FRCH 308, WLIT 308, ETHS 308, WGST 308, FRCH 408, and WLIT 408. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 315	Origins of Anime: Classical Texts, Modern Manga, Anime, and Tales	3 Units	Modern anime and manga authors and artists captivate audiences with rich stories and stylized art. This course investigates the origins of these stories by engaging premodern Japanese texts (in English language translation) and modern literary theory. Throughout the semester we will pay particular attention to commonalties among these literatures and narrative genres, as well as the extent they differ due to temporal/socio/religio/political concerns. Western and Asian literary theories, especially those concerning topics of translation, replacement, negotiation with classics, and gender and sexuality will also be extensively explored. We will interpret the historic human endeavor of story telling within the contexts of time and space and through a critical self-awareness of our own positions in the modern world. Students will prepare individual research projects and be responsible for finding and presenting primary sources and secondary research. The instructor will provide background information on political, cultural, and religious history as well as present on details of literary theory. The aim is to encourage students to critically analyze the modern perception of past events. Every topic will be addressed in three phases. First, the students will discover historical events, literature, and people through reading primary sources in English translation. In a second phase, we will see how these stories are depicted in movies, animation, or manga. Finally, students will perform research to explore the differences between the premodern sources and their modern adaptation and determine how we can use such a comparison to critically analyze the way modern storytellers recreate the past. Class sessions will combine lectures, discussion, and audio- visual materials. Offered as JAPN 315 and WLIT 315. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 318	Comedy	3 Units	Origin, ambiance, and development of Greek Old Comedy and persisting characteristics of the genre. Translation of selected plays from Greek into English.  Offered as GREK 308, GREK 408, WLIT 318, and WLIT 418.
WLIT 319	Greek Tragedy: Plays and Performance in Ancient Athens	3 Units	This course provides students the opportunity to read a significant number of ancient Greek tragedies in modern English translations. We read, study, and discuss selected works by Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides, as well as selected criticism, ancient and modern, of these plays. All semester we read the plays as literature composed for performance. We study literary elements within the plays and theatrical possibilities inherent in the texts. As we read the plays, we pay close attention to the historical context and look for what each play can tell us about myth, religion, ethics, and society in ancient Athens. Finally, we give attention to the way these tragic dramas and the theater in which they were performed have continued to inspire literature and theater for thousands of years. Lectures provide historical background on the playwrights, the plays, the mythic and historical background, and possible interpretation of the texts as literature and as performance pieces. Students discuss the plays that they read in class. The course has three examinations and a final project that includes writing an essay and staging a monologue or scene from one of the tragedies. Offered as CLSC 319, CLSC 419, THTR 319, THTR 419, WLIT 319, and WLIT 419. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 320	Chinese Popular Culture	3 Units	In this course we are going to study Chinese (including Mainland China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Chinese Diaspora) popular culture since the 1980s. By examining different forms of popular culture, including popular literature, film, music, TV programs, posters, the Internet, etc., we will be looking into their political, ideological, sociological, cultural, and psychological mechanisms. The film viewing will take place outside the class. Offered as: CHIN 320, ASIA 320 and WLIT 320. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 322	Theater in Ancient Rome	3 Units	This course is designed as a continuation of and companion to CLSC/THTR/WLIT 319/419 Greek Tragedy: Plays and Performance in Ancient Athens, although it may be taken without having taken, or before having taken, that course. Students in Theater in Ancient Rome will read a significant number of ancient Roman plays in modern English translation and study non-literary theatrical entertainment of the Roman Republic and Empire, that may include mime and pantomime, gladiatorial shows, political speeches, courtroom drama, and various other spectacles. The dramatic texts that we shall study include the fragments of early Latin drama, selected comedies by Plautus and Terence, and the tragedies of Seneca. We shall also consider Greek and Roman literature that comments on Roman theatrical practices. These works will be read for their literary merits and theatrical possibilities, while at the same time examining them for what they can tell us about Roman civilization. Similarly, when studying the non-literary theatrical works we shall examine historical and theatrical context including archaeological evidence from theaters and amphitheaters and material remains (masks, depictions of actors and gladiators on vases, terra cotta lamps, mosaics, etc.). Finally, while the majority of the course focuses on drama originally written in Latin and theatrical entertainments performed in ancient Rome, the course may include a brief survey of selected post-classical works indebted to the tradition of Roman drama and theater. Authors that may be studied include Hrotsvitha, Marlowe, Shakespeare, Racine, Molière, and the legacy of Roman drama and theater in contemporary stage and cinema such as Sondheim's A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum. Thus a secondary concern will be to consider how and in what ways the legacy of Roman drama and theater has continued to shape the dramatic arts since antiquity.  Offered as CLSC 322, CLSC 422, THTR 322, THTR 422, WLIT 322, and WLIT 422. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 329	Modern and Contemporary Drama	3 Units	This course explores the development of western drama and theatre from 1860 through present-day productions.  The course emphasizes the relationship between different theatrical representations and their historical and social context.  Shakespeare's well-known dictum that "theatre holds a mirror up to nature" is expanded when one examines who is holding that mirror, and how their actions participate in the constantly shifting construction of culture.  Given this premise, the course investigates the development of specific European cultures (England, France, Germany, and Italy) as well as other regions (the United States, South America, and Russia) through the - live and literary - representations they make of themselves.   Offered as THTR 329, WLIT 329 and THTR 429. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: At least Sophomore standing
WLIT 336	Elegiac Poetry	3 Units	In this course we shall translate and interpret selected elegies by Catullus, Tibulius, Propertius, and Ovid.  We will also devote considerable class time to the reading and in-depth analysis of the major secondary literature, starting with the introductory pieces in the newest companions published by Brill and Cambridge, and moving on to fundamental articles and perhaps even a full scholarly monograph.   Offered as LATN 356, LATN 456, WLIT 336, and WLIT 436.
WLIT 337	Love and Loss: Reading The Tale of Genji	3 Units	Murasaki Shikibu's The Tale of Genji (c. 1000 CE), the great Japanese classic often referred to as "the world's first novel," has been praised by countless readers and scholars since it was first circulated within the imperial court. In this course we will read the entire text in English translation. We will focus on themes of love and loss, paying special attention to the substitution that results from the hero, the shining prince Genji, losing his mother at a tender age and attempting to fill the void she left. Since Genji is popularly thought of as a "playboy," we will investigate the thematic, historic, political, social, and religious descriptions within Genji's (many) love affairs, with a special emphasis on issues of gender. We will also consider the poetry, imagery, costume, music, religion, theater, and material culture of the mid-Heian era, which is encapsulated in the tale.  Students will prepare individual research projects and be responsible for finding and presenting primary sources and secondary research. The instructor will provide background information on political, cultural, and religious history as well as present on details of literary theory. The aim is to encourage students to critically analyze the modern perception of the past. Class sessions will combine lectures, discussion, and audio- visual materials.  All material is in English translation. There are no prerequisites. The course is conducted in English. Offered as JAPN 337 and WLIT 337. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 341	Power of Words: Ritual Uses of Premodern Japanese Literature	3 Units	In premodern Japan, it was not only death and mourning ritual and practice that could pacify the spirit of the deceased, but also language. Authors consciously crafted the words of their works to simultaneously express the grief associated with longing and pacify the spirits of the dead. These words are called kotodama (power of words). From as far back as the eighth-century Kojiki (Records of Ancient Matters) and Nihon Shoki (The Chronicles of Japan) textual representations of mourning were linked with special uses of language and spirit pacification. At the death of Ame-no-wakahiko (a mythological god), his parents constructed a mourning hut and performed songs to secure his spirit in the afterworld. As several authors have demonstrated, from kotodama in the mid-eighth-century poetic anthology Man'y'sh, (Collection of Ten Thousand Leaves) to linked verse (renga) in medieval Japan, carefully constructed literary language also had a place in ritual pacification of the spirits of the dead. Words were not simple expressions of grief; they held power.  All material is in English translation. The course is conducted in English. All material will be provided via PDF. Offered as JAPN 341 and WLIT 341 and RLGN 341. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 348	Horace: Odes and Epodes	3 Units	Readings and discussion of extensive selections from the poetry of Horace; consideration of Horace as exemplifying the spirit of the Augustan Age.  Offered as LATN 308, LATN 408, WLIT 348, and WLIT 448.
WLIT 349	Medieval Latin	3 Units	Reading and interpretation of Latin texts from the Middle Ages. Material selected according to the needs and interests of students.   Offered as LATN 309, LATN 409, WLIT 349, and WLIT 449.
WLIT 351	Latin Didactic Literature	3 Units	Readings from didactic poetry such as Lucretius and Vergil's Georgics.  Parodies like Ovid's Ars Amatoria or prose treatises may also be introduced. Offered as LATN 351, LATN 451, WLIT 351, and WLIT 451. Prereq: 200-level LATN or equivalent.
WLIT 353	Science and Technology in France	3 Units	This course is an exploration of the development of science and technology in France, from their rise in the 18th and 19th centuries to their recent renaissance, from both a scientific and a humanities perspective. A significant component will focus on the contributions of women to science in France. Site visits in France will include the Marie Curie laboratory, the Pasteur Institute, and the Museum of Natural History. Readings will come from the fields of history of science, French cultural history, and French literature. Offered as FRCH 328, FRCH 428, WGST 333, WLIT 353 and WLIT 453. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 354	Drama	3 Units	Reading of at least one play each by Plautus and Terence. Attention to the history of Latin and Greek New Comedy, and the contrasting styles of the two authors. Offered as LATN 354, LATN 454, WLIT 354, and WLIT 454.
WLIT 355	Modern Japanese Novels and the West	3 Units	This course will compare modern Japanese and Western novellas, drama, and novels.  Comparisons will focus on the themes of family, gender and alienation, which subsume a number of interrelated sub-themes such as marriage, home, human sexuality, amae (dependence), innocence, experience, death, God/gods, and nature (the ecosystem).   Offered as JAPN 355 and WLIT 355. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 360	Development of Theater: Beginnings to English Renaissance	3 Units	This course explores the foundations of theater in Western civilization, beginning with Greece and then charting and analyzing the developments in playwriting, design, acting and theater architecture.  Students read a wide variety of plays in order to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the history of the art form, but also learn how theater has played an integral societal function as a medium of political, economic, and cultural commentary.  Development of Theater I explores developments from Aeschylus to the English Renaissance.  Offered for undergraduates as THTR 325 and WLIT 360.  Students who have taken THTR 228/WLIT 228 are not allowed to enroll in this course.  Offered as THTR 325, WLIT 360, and THTR 425. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: At least Sophomore standing.
WLIT 361	Development of Theater: Renaissance to Romanticism	3 Units	This course explores the many developments in playwriting, design, acting, and theater architecture across the world.  Students read a wide variety of plays in order to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the history of the art form, but also learn how theater has played an integral societal function as a medium of political, economic, and cultural commentary.  Development of Theater II not only explores the development of theatrical conventions in Spain, England, Italy, France and other European countries that lead to the creation of modern drama, but the course also offers an in-depth look at the history and conventions of theater in India, Korea, China, and Japan.   Offered as THTR 326, WLIT 361, and THTR 426. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: At least Sophomore standing.
WLIT 365	German Literature in Translation	3 Units	Goethe defined "World Literature" (Weltliteratur) as "Intellectual Trade Relations" (geistiger Handelsverkehr). This course gives students the opportunity to study German literary works in translation and thus to trade intellectual relations with a literary culture previously unknown to them. Counts toward the German major only as a related course. No knowledge of German required. Offered as GRMN 365 and WLIT 365.
WLIT 365E	The Immigrant Experience	3 Units	Study of fictional and/or autobiographical narrative by authors whose families have experienced immigration to the U.S. Among the ethnic groups represented are Asian-American, Jewish-American, Hispanic-American.  May include several ethnic groups or focus on a single one.  Attention is paid to historical and social aspects of immigration and ethnicity.  Maximum 6 credits.  Offered as  ENGL 365E, ENGL 365EC, ENGL 465E, WLIT 365E and WLIT 465E. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
WLIT 365N	Topics in African-American Literature	3 Units	Selected topics and writers from nineteenth, twentieth, and twenty-first century African-American literature.  May focus on a genre, a single author or a group of authors, a theme or themes.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as AFST 365N, ENGL 365N, ETHS 365N, WLIT 365N, ENGL 465N, and WLIT 465N. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
WLIT 365Q	Post-Colonial Literature	3 Units	Readings in national and regional literatures from former European colonies such as Australia and African countries.  Maximum 6 credits.  Offered as ENGL 365Q, ENGL 365QC, ETHS 365Q, WLIT 365Q, ENGL 465Q, and WLIT 465Q. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
WLIT 368	Topics in Film	3 Units	Individual topics include Horror Films, Storytelling & Cinema, Science Fiction Films, Films of Alfred Hitchcock, American Cinema & Culture, History of Cinema, and many others. This course has no prerequisites and welcomes first year students. Other than the number of credits from one department a student can apply toward graduating, there is no limit to the number of times Topics in Film can be taken. A student who has previously taken ENGL 368C may receive credit for ENGL 368 only if the themes/topics are different. Offered as ENGL 368, ENGL 468, WLIT 368, and WLIT 468.
WLIT 370	Greek Prose Composition	3 Units	This course introduces students to the principles and practice of composing continuous passages of Greek prose.  It is designed to review and to strengthen students' command of Attic forms while becoming more aware of the ways Greek syntax was employed to express thought.  Via practice at writing Greek prose, the ultimate goal is for the students to become more proficient and sensitive readers of ancient Greek.   Offered as GREK 370, GREK 470, WLIT 370 and WLIT 470.
WLIT 375	Russian Literature in Translation	3 Units	Topics vary according to student and faculty interest. May include Russian classical and modern literature, cinema, women writers, individual authors. May count towards Russian minor. No knowledge of Russian required. Offered as RUSN 375 and WLIT 375. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 385	Hispanic Literature in Translation	3 Units	Critical analysis and appreciation of representative literary masterpieces from Spain and Latin America, and by Hispanics living in the U.S. Texts cover a variety of genres and a range of literary periods, from works by Cervantes to those of Gabriel Garcia Marquez. The course will examine the relationship between literature and other forms of artistic production, as well as the development of the Hispanic literary text within the context of historical events and cultural production of the period. Counts toward Spanish major only as related course. No knowledge of Spanish required. Offered as ETHS 385, ETHS 485,  SPAN 385,  SPAN 485,  WLIT 385, and WLIT 485. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 386	Russian Culture and Civilization: From Varangians to Revolutionaries (862-1917)	3 Units	This course will explore the history, art, and literature of the Eastern Slavic/Russian people from the ninth century to end of the Russian empire in 1917. Students will trace the formation and transformation of the Slavic/Russian state, from Kievan Rus' to the Tsardom of Muscovy and to the Russian empire. The historical background will be illuminated by the literary and artistic works created by outstanding Russian writers, poets, painters, and composers. At the end of the course, students will gain a solid knowledge of the Russian cultural ground and understand the roots of Russian national and cultural identity. Offered as RUSN 386 and WLIT 386. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 387	Literary and Critical Theory	3 Units	A survey of major schools and texts of literary and critical theory. May be historically or thematically organized. Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 387, WLIT 387, ENGL 487, and WLIT 487. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
WLIT 390	Topics in World Literature	3 Units	In-depth examination of specific critical and literary theories and of their relevance for literature and culture studies. Authors, works and instructor may vary. Offered as WLIT 390 and WLIT 490.
WLIT 391	Introduction to Text Semiotics	3 Units	Introduction to Text Semiotics addresses both students of Literature and students in Cognitive Science.  Most of the authors included in the reading list extend their linguistic approach towards fields that intersect literature, psychology, philosophy, aesthetics, and anthropology.  The scholarly traditions of text analysis and structural theory of meaning, including authors from classical formalism, structuralism, structural semiotics, and new criticism will be connected to cognitive theories of meaning construction in test, discourse, and cultural expressions in general.  The focus of this course, taught as a seminar, is on empirical studies, specific text analyses, discourse analyses, speech act analyses, and other studies of speech, writing, and uses of language in cultural contexts.  This course thus introduces to a study of literature and cultural expressions based on cognitive science and modern semiotics--the new view that has be coined Cognitive Semiotics. Offered as COGS 391 and WLIT 391.
WLIT 395	Advanced Topics in Akkadian Literature	3 Units	Directed readings in selected Akkadian texts in the cuneiform script either of the Old Babylonian or the Neo-Assyrian periods to serve the individual interests and needs of students (texts may be drawn from a variety of text genres: mythological, historical, scientific, medical, correspondence, religious, etc.). Offered as AKKD 395, AKKD 495, WLIT 395 and WLIT 495. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: AKKD 101 and AKKD 102.
WLIT 397	Honors Thesis I	3 Units	Intensive study of a literary, linguistic, or cultural topic with a faculty member, leading to the writing of a research paper. Prereq: Senior status.
WLIT 398	Honors Thesis II	3 Units	Continuation of WLIT 397. Prereq: WLIT 397 and senior status.
WLIT 399	Independent Study	1 - 3 Units	For majors and advanced students under special circumstances.
WLIT 401	Greek Prose Authors	3 Units	Readings from authors such as Plato, Lysias, Xenophon, and Herodotus.  Offered as GREK 201, GREK 401, WLIT 201 and WLIT 401.
WLIT 402	Introduction to Greek Poetry	3 Units	Primarily readings from Homer, Hesiod, and Theocritus. Selections from Greek lyric may be introduced at the instructor's discretion.   Offered as GREK 202, GREK 402, WLIT 202, and WLIT 402.
WLIT 405	Readings from the Epic of Gilgamesh	3 Units	In this course, we will read the entire Standard Babylonian recension of the Epic of Gilgamesh, considered the first great work of literature, from the original Akkadian text. While the primary goal of the course will be to become proficient readers of Akkadian, we will take some excursus on topics such as Babylonian religion, whether Gilgamesh was a historical figure or not, how the text was put together, and its possible influence on later heroic traditions such as the Greco-Roman. Offered as AKKD 205, AKKD 405, WLIT 205 and WLIT 405. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: AKKD 101 and AKKD 102.
WLIT 406	Tragedy	3 Units	Reading and interpretation of selected plays of Aeschylus, Euripides, and Sophocles.   Offered as GREK 306, GREK 406, WLIT 306, and WLIT 406.
WLIT 407	History	3 Units	Extensive reading in Thucydides' History of the Peloponnesian War, especially Books VI and VII, the expedition against Syracuse.   Offered as GREK 307, GREK 407, WLIT 307 and WLIT 407.
WLIT 408	Immigration and the Paris Experience	3 Units	Three-week immersion learning experience living and studying in Paris. The focus of the course is the culture, literature, and the arts of the African, Arab, and Asian communities of Paris. At least half of the course looks at issues surrounding immigration that affect women in particular. Students spend a minimum of fifteen hours per week visiting cultural centers and museums and interviewing authors and students about the immigrant experience. Assigned readings complement course activities. Students enrolled in FRCH 308/408 do coursework in French. WLIT 308/408, ETHS 308, and WGST 308 students have the option of completing coursework in English. Graduate students have additional course requirements. Offered as FRCH 308, WLIT 308, ETHS 308, WGST 308, FRCH 408, and WLIT 408. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Graduate standing.
WLIT 418	Comedy	3 Units	Origin, ambiance, and development of Greek Old Comedy and persisting characteristics of the genre. Translation of selected plays from Greek into English.  Offered as GREK 308, GREK 408, WLIT 318, and WLIT 418.
WLIT 419	Greek Tragedy: Plays and Performance in Ancient Athens	3 Units	This course provides students the opportunity to read a significant number of ancient Greek tragedies in modern English translations. We read, study, and discuss selected works by Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides, as well as selected criticism, ancient and modern, of these plays. All semester we read the plays as literature composed for performance. We study literary elements within the plays and theatrical possibilities inherent in the texts. As we read the plays, we pay close attention to the historical context and look for what each play can tell us about myth, religion, ethics, and society in ancient Athens. Finally, we give attention to the way these tragic dramas and the theater in which they were performed have continued to inspire literature and theater for thousands of years. Lectures provide historical background on the playwrights, the plays, the mythic and historical background, and possible interpretation of the texts as literature and as performance pieces. Students discuss the plays that they read in class. The course has three examinations and a final project that includes writing an essay and staging a monologue or scene from one of the tragedies. Offered as CLSC 319, CLSC 419, THTR 319, THTR 419, WLIT 319, and WLIT 419. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 422	Theater in Ancient Rome	3 Units	This course is designed as a continuation of and companion to CLSC/THTR/WLIT 319/419 Greek Tragedy: Plays and Performance in Ancient Athens, although it may be taken without having taken, or before having taken, that course. Students in Theater in Ancient Rome will read a significant number of ancient Roman plays in modern English translation and study non-literary theatrical entertainment of the Roman Republic and Empire, that may include mime and pantomime, gladiatorial shows, political speeches, courtroom drama, and various other spectacles. The dramatic texts that we shall study include the fragments of early Latin drama, selected comedies by Plautus and Terence, and the tragedies of Seneca. We shall also consider Greek and Roman literature that comments on Roman theatrical practices. These works will be read for their literary merits and theatrical possibilities, while at the same time examining them for what they can tell us about Roman civilization. Similarly, when studying the non-literary theatrical works we shall examine historical and theatrical context including archaeological evidence from theaters and amphitheaters and material remains (masks, depictions of actors and gladiators on vases, terra cotta lamps, mosaics, etc.). Finally, while the majority of the course focuses on drama originally written in Latin and theatrical entertainments performed in ancient Rome, the course may include a brief survey of selected post-classical works indebted to the tradition of Roman drama and theater. Authors that may be studied include Hrotsvitha, Marlowe, Shakespeare, Racine, Molière, and the legacy of Roman drama and theater in contemporary stage and cinema such as Sondheim's A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum. Thus a secondary concern will be to consider how and in what ways the legacy of Roman drama and theater has continued to shape the dramatic arts since antiquity.  Offered as CLSC 322, CLSC 422, THTR 322, THTR 422, WLIT 322, and WLIT 422. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 432	Vergil	3 Units	Primarily readings from The Aeneid; selections from Vergil's other work may be introduced at instructor's discretion. Recommended preparation: LATN 201 or equivalent.   Offered as LATN 202, LATN 402, WLIT 232 and WLIT 432.
WLIT 436	Elegiac Poetry	3 Units	In this course we shall translate and interpret selected elegies by Catullus, Tibulius, Propertius, and Ovid.  We will also devote considerable class time to the reading and in-depth analysis of the major secondary literature, starting with the introductory pieces in the newest companions published by Brill and Cambridge, and moving on to fundamental articles and perhaps even a full scholarly monograph.   Offered as LATN 356, LATN 456, WLIT 336, and WLIT 436.
WLIT 441	Latin Prose Authors	3 Units	Reading and discussion of such prose authors as Cicero, Caesar, Livy or Pliny.  Offered as LATN 201, LATN 401, WLIT 241 and WLIT 441.
WLIT 448	Horace: Odes and Epodes	3 Units	Readings and discussion of extensive selections from the poetry of Horace; consideration of Horace as exemplifying the spirit of the Augustan Age.  Offered as LATN 308, LATN 408, WLIT 348, and WLIT 448.
WLIT 449	Medieval Latin	3 Units	Reading and interpretation of Latin texts from the Middle Ages. Material selected according to the needs and interests of students.   Offered as LATN 309, LATN 409, WLIT 349, and WLIT 449.
WLIT 451	Latin Didactic Literature	3 Units	Readings from didactic poetry such as Lucretius and Vergil's Georgics.  Parodies like Ovid's Ars Amatoria or prose treatises may also be introduced. Offered as LATN 351, LATN 451, WLIT 351, and WLIT 451.
WLIT 453	Science and Technology in France	3 Units	This course is an exploration of the development of science and technology in France, from their rise in the 18th and 19th centuries to their recent renaissance, from both a scientific and a humanities perspective. A significant component will focus on the contributions of women to science in France. Site visits in France will include the Marie Curie laboratory, the Pasteur Institute, and the Museum of Natural History. Readings will come from the fields of history of science, French cultural history, and French literature. Offered as FRCH 328, FRCH 428, WGST 333, WLIT 353 and WLIT 453. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
WLIT 454	Drama	3 Units	Reading of at least one play each by Plautus and Terence. Attention to the history of Latin and Greek New Comedy, and the contrasting styles of the two authors. Offered as LATN 354, LATN 454, WLIT 354, and WLIT 454.
WLIT 465E	The Immigrant Experience	3 Units	Study of fictional and/or autobiographical narrative by authors whose families have experienced immigration to the U.S. Among the ethnic groups represented are Asian-American, Jewish-American, Hispanic-American.  May include several ethnic groups or focus on a single one.  Attention is paid to historical and social aspects of immigration and ethnicity.  Maximum 6 credits.  Offered as  ENGL 365E, ENGL 365EC, ENGL 465E, WLIT 365E and WLIT 465E. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Graduate standing.
WLIT 465N	Topics in African-American Literature	3 Units	Selected topics and writers from nineteenth, twentieth, and twenty-first century African-American literature.  May focus on a genre, a single author or a group of authors, a theme or themes.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as AFST 365N, ENGL 365N, ETHS 365N, WLIT 365N, ENGL 465N, and WLIT 465N. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Graduate standing.
WLIT 465Q	Post-Colonial Literature	3 Units	Readings in national and regional literatures from former European colonies such as Australia and African countries.  Maximum 6 credits.  Offered as ENGL 365Q, ENGL 365QC, ETHS 365Q, WLIT 365Q, ENGL 465Q, and WLIT 465Q. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Graduate standing.
WLIT 468	Topics in Film	3 Units	Individual topics include Horror Films, Storytelling & Cinema, Science Fiction Films, Films of Alfred Hitchcock, American Cinema & Culture, History of Cinema, and many others. This course has no prerequisites and welcomes first year students. Other than the number of credits from one department a student can apply toward graduating, there is no limit to the number of times Topics in Film can be taken. A student who has previously taken ENGL 368C may receive credit for ENGL 368 only if the themes/topics are different. Offered as ENGL 368, ENGL 468, WLIT 368, and WLIT 468. Prereq: Graduate standing.
WLIT 470	Greek Prose Composition	3 Units	This course introduces students to the principles and practice of composing continuous passages of Greek prose.  It is designed to review and to strengthen students' command of Attic forms while becoming more aware of the ways Greek syntax was employed to express thought.  Via practice at writing Greek prose, the ultimate goal is for the students to become more proficient and sensitive readers of ancient Greek.   Offered as GREK 370, GREK 470, WLIT 370 and WLIT 470.
WLIT 485	Hispanic Literature in Translation	3 Units	Critical analysis and appreciation of representative literary masterpieces from Spain and Latin America, and by Hispanics living in the U.S. Texts cover a variety of genres and a range of literary periods, from works by Cervantes to those of Gabriel Garcia Marquez. The course will examine the relationship between literature and other forms of artistic production, as well as the development of the Hispanic literary text within the context of historical events and cultural production of the period. Counts toward Spanish major only as related course. No knowledge of Spanish required. Offered as ETHS 385, ETHS 485,  SPAN 385,  SPAN 485,  WLIT 385, and WLIT 485. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Graduate standing.
WLIT 487	Literary and Critical Theory	3 Units	A survey of major schools and texts of literary and critical theory. May be historically or thematically organized. Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 387, WLIT 387, ENGL 487, and WLIT 487. Prereq: Graduate standing.
WLIT 490	Topics in World Literature	3 Units	In-depth examination of specific critical and literary theories and of their relevance for literature and culture studies. Authors, works and instructor may vary. Offered as WLIT 390 and WLIT 490. Prereq: Graduate standing.
WLIT 495	Advanced Topics in Akkadian Literature	3 Units	Directed readings in selected Akkadian texts in the cuneiform script either of the Old Babylonian or the Neo-Assyrian periods to serve the individual interests and needs of students (texts may be drawn from a variety of text genres: mythological, historical, scientific, medical, correspondence, religious, etc.). Offered as AKKD 395, AKKD 495, WLIT 395 and WLIT 495. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: AKKD 101 and AKKD 102.
WLIT 601	Independent Study	1 - 18 Units	For graduate students under special circumstances. Prereq: Graduate standing.
WLIT 651	Thesis M.A.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
EBME 105	Introduction to Biomedical Engineering	3 Units	This course introduces students to a wide variety of biomedical engineering fields including: biomaterials, biomechanics, biomedical devices & instrumentation, and biomedical computing & analysis.  Emphasis is given to recognizing the difference between medical technology as a subject area vs. career tracks within which this subject area is: imagined, designed, fabricated and used.  Students learn to distinguish the difference between how a scientist, an engineer, and a clinician are trained and interact with medical technology.  Foundational topics like:  engineering design, structure-function relationship, biomimicry, and biocompatibility are presented at an introductory level.  Students well served by this course include:  first year students trying to decide if they want to major in biomedical engineering, first year students who know they want to major in biomedical engineering but are not certain which track they wish to pursue, and upper class students in non-biomedical engineering majors who are looking for deeper insight into what this fast growing field is about.
EBME 201	Physiology-Biophysics I	3 Units	Fundamental concepts of physiology from the cells to organ systems.  Cell structure and function: DNA-RNA related enzyme/protein synthesis, membrane permeation (receptors/channels/gates), cellular biochemistry and energetic metabolic functions. Essential systems-level concepts include endocrinology, immunology, cellular/capillary/interphase transport, regulation of fluid volume, solutes, and pH. Liver, renal and respiratory physiology. Basic concepts in thermodynamics, transport and kinetics provide a framework for quantitative analysis and modeling of systems physiology. Prereq: Must have declared major or minor in Biomedical Engineering.
EBME 202	Physiology-Biophysics II	3 Units	This course is an extension of EBME 201 that will include structure and function of (1) the nervous system, including vision, somatic and proprioceptive sensation, and control of movement, (2) skeletal and smooth muscle, (3) cardiac muscle and the cardiovascular system, and (4) the metabolic system. The material will be taught from a quantitative and functional perspective, with some examples of human pathophysiology. Prereq: EBME 201.
EBME 300	Dynamics of Biological Systems: A Quantitative Introduction to Biology	3 Units	This course will introduce students to dynamic biological phenomena, from the molecular to the population level, and models of these dynamical phenomena.  It will describe a biological system, discuss how to model its dynamics, and experimentally evaluate the resulting models.  Topics will include molecular dynamics of biological molecules, kinetics of cell metabolism and the cell cycle, biophysics of excitability, scaling laws for biological systems, biomechanics, and population dynamics.  Mathematical tools for the analysis of dynamic biological processes will also be presented.  Students will manipulate and analyze simulations of biological processes, and learn to formulate and analyze their own models. This course satisfies a laboratory requirement for the biology major. Offered as BIOL 300 and EBME 300.
EBME 303	Structure of Biological Materials	3 Units	Structure of proteins, nucleic acids, connective tissue and bone, from molecular to microscopic levels.  An introduction to bioengineering biological materials and biomimetic materials, and an understanding of how different instruments may be used for imaging, identification and characterization of biological materials. Recommended preparation: EMAC 270. Offered as: EBME 303 and EMAC 303. Prereq: EBME 201, EBME 202, and EBME 306.
EBME 305	Materials for Prosthetics and Orthotics	3 Units	A synthesis of skeletal tissue structure and biology, materials engineering, and strength of materials concepts.  This course is centered on deepening the concept of biocompatibility  and using it to pose and solve biomaterials problems.  We cover: fundamental concepts of materials used for load bearing medical applications, wear, corrosion, and failure of implants.  Structure and properties of hard tissues and joints are presented using a size hierarchy motif.  Tools and analysis paradigms useful in the characterization of biomaterials are covered in the context of orthopedic and dental applications. Prereq: EBME 306 and EBME 370 or Requisites Not Met permission.
EBME 306	Introduction to Biomedical Materials	3 Units	Biomaterials design and application in different tissue and organ systems.  The relationship between the physical and chemical structure of biomaterials, functional properties, and biological response. Prereq: EBME 201 and EBME 202.
EBME 307	Biomechanical Prosthetic Systems	3 Units	Introduction to the basic biomechanics of human movement and applications to the design and evaluation of artificial devices intended to restore or improve movement lost due to injury or disease.  Measurement techniques in movement biomechanics, including motion analysis, electromyography, and gait analysis.  Design and use of upper and lower limb prostheses.  Principles of neuroprostheses with applications to paralyzed upper and lower extremities. Recommended preparation: Consent of instructor and senior standing. Prereq: EBME 308.
EBME 308	Biomedical Signals and Systems	3 Units	Quantitative analysis of biomedical signals and physiological systems.  Time domain and frequency domain analysis of linear systems.  Fourier and Laplace transforms.  A/D conversion and sampling.  Filter design.  Computational laboratory experiences with biomedical applications. Prereq: MATH 224 or MATH 228.  Prereq or Coreq: ENGR 210.  Coreq: EBME 358.
EBME 309	Modeling of Biomedical Systems	3 Units	Mathematical modeling and computational methods applied to biomedical systems. Spatially lumped and distributed models of electrical, mechanical, and chemical processes applied to cells, tissues, organ, and whole-body systems. Prereq: EBME 202 and EBME 308. Coreq: EBME 359.
EBME 310	Principles of Biomedical Instrumentation	3 Units	Physical, chemical, and biological, and system principles for biomedical measurements. Modular blocks and system integration. Sensors for displacement, force, pressure, flow, temperature, biopotentials, chemical composition of body fluids and biomaterial characterization. Patient safety related to instrumentation will also be covered. Prereq: EBME 308. Coreq: EBME 360.
EBME 316	Biomaterials for Drug Delivery	3 Units	The teaching objective is to provide students with a basic understanding of the principles of design and engineering of well-defined molecular structures and architectures intended for applications in controlled release and organ-targeted drug delivery.  The course will discuss the therapeutic basic of drug delivery based on drug pharmacodynamics and clinical pharmacokinetics.  Biomaterials with specialized structural and interfacial properties will be introduced to achieve drug targeting and controlled release.  Offered as EBME 316 and EBME 416. Prereq: EBME 306.
EBME 317	Fundamentals of Biomechanics	3 Units	Fundamentals of biomechanics will teach students how to apply basic principles of mechanics to understand, explain and model biological processes at across the relevant length-scales (cell-tissue-organ-organism), and over a broad range of physiological systems (respiratory, ocular, circulatory, and musculoskeletal). Physiology of organs and tissues that are involved in biomechanical functions will also be covered. Offered as EMAE 307 and EBME 317. Prereq: ENGR 200.
EBME 318	Biomedical Engineering Laboratory	1 Unit	Experiments for measurement, assisting, replacement, or control of various biomedical systems.  Students choose a few lab experiences from a large number of offerings relevant to all BME sequences.  Experiments are conducted primarily in faculty labs with 3-8 students participating.  Recommended preparation: ENGR 210. Prereq: BME Major, EBME 201, EBME 202 and Prereq or Coreq: EBME 308.
EBME 320	Biomedical Imaging	3 Units	General principles, instrumentation, and applications of biomedical imaging.  Topics include: x-ray, ultrasound, computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, nuclear imaging, image reconstruction, and image quality.  Recommended preparation: ENGR 210 and EBME 202 or equivalent. Prereq: EBME 308 or ECSE 246.
EBME 325	Introduction to Tissue Engineering	3 Units	The goal of this course is to present students with a firm understanding of the primary components, design principles, and engineering concepts central to the field of tissue engineering. First, the biological principles of tissue formation during morphogenesis and wound repair will be examined. The cellular processes underlying these events will be presented with an emphasis on microenvironment regulation of cell behavior. Biomimetic approaches to controlling cell function and tissue formation via the development of biomaterial systems will then be investigated. Case studies of regeneration strategies for specific tissues will be presented in order to examine the different tissue-specific engineering strategies that may be employed. Special current topics in tissue engineering will also be covered. Recommended preparation: EBME 306, BIOL 362, and CHEM 223.
EBME 327	Bioelectric Engineering	3 Units	Quantitative bioelectricity: action potentials and cable equations. Origins of biopotentials, biopotential recording, electrical stimulation of excitable tissue, electrodes/electrochemistry and cardiac electrophysiology. Overview of major biomedical devices. Prereq: EBME 201 and ENGR 210.
EBME 328	Biomedical Engineering R&D Training	1 Unit	This course will provide research and development in the laboratory of a mentoring faculty member.  Varied R&D experiences will include activities in biomedical instrumentation, tissue engineering, imaging, drug delivery, and neural engineering.  Each Student must identify a faculty mentor, and together they will create description of the training experience prior to the first class. Prereq: EBME 201 and EBME 202.
EBME 329	Tissue Biomechanics	3 Units	Building on prior coursework in the mechanical behavior of skeletal biological tissues and systems, this course will expand students' understanding of the biomechanics of tissue and the influence of material properties on the structure and function of organs and organisms. Specific course topics will include structure and functional relationships in tissues and organs; the response of the heart, vasculature, and tissue scaffolds to mechanical loads, including characteristics such as nonlinearity, viscoelasticity, and orthotropy.  Emphasis is placed on integrating basic analytical, experimental, and computational methods for a more complete understanding of the biomechanics of organs and tissues. Prereq: EBME 201 and EBME 202.
EBME 330	Clinical Correlates in Biomedical Engineering	1 Unit	Clinical correlations in biomedical engineering enable synthesis of basic engineering concepts around applications in medical practice.  In course, students will draw upon prior training in biophysics, anatomic structure and function, and mathematical modeling of physiologic systems in a weekly case-based critical care scenario.  Blending engineering and clinical concepts in this fashion will expand student's medical expertise.  This eight-week course will feature six critical care cases designed to associate and translate engineering concepts into relevant medical knowledge. Course didactic components will be posted on Canvas, and students will be expected to read and prepare arguments for each case to be discussed in class. Successful students will conclude this course with enhanced systems thinking and insight on prior biomedical knowledge and innovation, as well as having demonstrated measurable improvement in their critical thinking skills in the field of medicine. Prereq: EBME 202.
EBME 350	Quantitative Molecular, Cellular and Tissue Bioengineering	3 Units	Physical and chemical principles associated with kinetics and mass transport. Molecular-cellular components incorporated in quantitative analysis of cellular, tissue, and organ systems. Mathematical and computational modeling developed for diagnostic and therapeutic applications. Offered as EBME 350 and ECHE 355. Prereq: Senior Status.
EBME 356	Introduction to Biomaterials Engineering - Laboratory	1 Unit	This is a core BME Laboratory course directed at providing Biomedical Engineering undergraduate students 'hands on' experience in a component of biomaterials engineering, specifically, biocompatibility. To that end, the course will focus on blood compatibility (hemocompatibility) of biomaterials, by teaching students how to analyze the interaction of blood components (proteins, platelets, RBCs) on biomedical relevant coated versus uncoated polymer surfaces. The students will learn important characterization techniques like contact angle measurement, UV-Vis spectroscopy and optical microscopy in the context of characterizing blood interactions with materials. Prereq: EBME 201 and EBME 202.  Prereq or Coreq: EBME 306.
EBME 358	Biomedical Signals and Systems Laboratory	1 Unit	Computational laboratory experiences with biomedical applications.  Numerical methods with MATLAB applications in biomedical engineering. Coreq: EBME 308.
EBME 359	Biomedical Computer Simulation Laboratory	1 Unit	Computer simulation of mathematical models of biomedical systems. Numerical methods with MATLAB applications. Coreq: EBME 309.
EBME 360	Biomedical Instrumentation Laboratory	1 Unit	A laboratory which focuses on the basic components of biomedical instrumentation and provides hands-on experience for students in EBME 310, Biomedical Instrumentation. The purpose of the course is to develop design skills and laboratory skills in analysis and circuit development. Coreq: EBME 310.
EBME 361	Biomedical Image Processing and Analysis	3 Units	Principles of image processing and analysis with applications to clinical and biomedical research.  Topics include image filtering, registration, morphological processing, segmentation, classification, and 3D image visualization.  There will be interesting, realistic computer projects in Matlab.    Offered as EBME 361 and EBME 461. Prereq: EBME 308.
EBME 370	Principles of Biomedical Engineering Design	3 Units	Students learn and implement the design process to produce working prototypes of medical devices with potential commercial value to meet significant clinical needs.  Critical examination of contemporary medical problems is used to develop a specific problem statement.  The class is divided into teams of 3 to 4 students.  Each team integrates their knowledge and skills to design a device to meet their clinical need.  Project planning and management, including resource allocation, milestones, and documentation, are required to ensure successful completion of projects within the allotted time and budget.  Formal design reviews by a panel of advisors and outside medical device experts are required every four weeks.  Every student is required to give oral presentations at each formal review and is responsible for formal documentation of the design process, resulting in an executive summary and complete design history file of the project.  The course culminates with a public presentation of the team's device to a panel of experts.  This course is expected to provide the student with a real-world, capstone design experience.  Recommended preparation: EBME 310 Prereq: Senior standing or requisites not met permission.
EBME 380	Biomedical Engineering Design Experience	3 Units	This course is the culmination of the BME educational experience in which the student will apply acquired skills and knowledge to create a working device or product to meet a medical need. Students will learn how to apply engineering skills to solve problems and physically realize a project design. The course structure includes regular meetings with a faculty project advisor, regular reports of accomplished activity, hands on fabrication of devices, and several lectures from leading engineers from industry and academia that have first hand experience in applying the principles of design to Biomedical Engineering. Students will also provide periodic oral progress reports and a final oral presentation with a written design report. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: EBME 370 and Senior standing or requisites not met permission.
EBME 398	Biomedical Engineering Research Experience I	1 - 3 Units	Biomedical engineering students doing independent research in a laboratory of a Primary or Adjunct BME Faculty may obtain credit for their research effort if they register for EBME 398 before they begin their research. The total number of credits is limited to three with a minimum of 1 credit per semester. Earning one credit requires about 4 hours of work per week. This is split between actual research in the lab (2-3 hours) and communication of results (1-2 hours). The communication component requires preparation of oral presentations and written reports. Grades are jointly determined by the research supervisor and the instructor. Students are encouraged to work with others in the faculty laboratory, but they must make a major contribution to the project. A research project is expected to include a significant engineering component, such as design and/or analysis. A design project must include a significant research component, such as applying the developed design to solve an actual biomedical problem. In advance of registration, all students must submit a course proposal (see FORMS on the BME web site). This proposal must be approved by their research mentor and submitted via email for approval by the course instructor. This course can qualify as a technical elective if the project includes material pertinent to the student's BME track and is approved in advance by the BME faculty member responsible for the BME track. To be approved as a technical elective, the project proposal should identify the new technical material the student will master, and a plan for assessing mastery.
EBME 399	Biomedical Engineering Research Experience II	1 - 3 Units	The project can be a continuation of the EBME 398 project but performed more independently, or a new project that is more challenging than the first project. As with EBME 398, the course may be taken for 1-3 credits, and repeated up to a total of 3 credits. Consent of Instructor is required. Prereq: EBME 398.
EBME 400	Principles of Physiology	1 Unit	Students are expected to learn the principles of physiology of cells, tissues, and organ systems.  These include cell structure and function, genetics, endocrinology, immunology, renal and respiratory physiology, the cardiovascular system and the nervous system. Prereq: Graduate standing.
EBME 400T	Graduate Teaching I	0 Unit	This will provide the Ph.D. candidate with experience in teaching undergraduate or graduate students. The experience is expected to consist of direct student contact, but will be based upon the specific departmental needs and teaching obligations. This teaching experience will be conducted under the supervision of the faculty member who is responsible for the course, but the academic advisor will assess the educational plan to ensure that it provides an educational opportunity for the student. Recommended preparation: UNIV 400, BME Ph.D. student.
EBME 401D	Biomedical Instrumentation and Signal Processing	3 Units	Graduate students with various undergraduate backgrounds will learn the fundamental principles of biomedical measurements that integrate instrumentation and signal processing with problem-based hands-on experience. Recommended preparation: Undergraduate circuit and signal processing class.
EBME 401L	Biomedical Instrumentation and Signal Analysis Laboratory	1 Unit	This course accompanies EBME401D, Biomedical Instrumentation and Signal Analysis, an introductory graduate course for MS and PhD BME students. Students in the PhD section are required to take this course to gain hands-on experience with each of the three areas of this course: measurement circuits/electronics, signal analysis, and transducers. The course involves the design, realization and testing of a device proposed by each student team. A final oral presentation and report on the results of the projects are graded and combined in one letter grade. Coreq: EBME 401D.
EBME 406	Polymers in Medicine	3 Units	This course covers the important fundamentals and applications of polymers in medicine, and consists of three major components: (i) the blood and soft-tissue reactions to polymer implants; (ii) the structure, characterization and modification of biomedical polymers; and (iii) the application of polymers in a broad range of cardiovascular and extravascular devices.  The chemical and physical characteristics of biomedical polymers and the properties required to meet the needs of the intended biological function will be presented.  Clinical evaluation, including recent advances and current problems associated with different polymer implants.  Recommended preparation: EBME 306 or equivalent. Offered as EBME 406 and EMAC 471. Prereq: Graduate Standing.
EBME 407	Neural Interfacing	3 Units	Neural interfacing refers to the principles, methods, and devices that bridge the boundary between engineered devices and the nervous system. It includes the methods and mechanisms to get information efficiently and effectively into and out of the nervous system to analyze and control its function. This course examines advanced engineering, neurobiology, neurophysiology, and the interaction between all of them to develop methods of connecting to the nervous system. The course builds on a sound background in Bioelectric Phenomenon to explore fundamental principles of recording and simulation, electrochemistry of electrodes in biological tissue, tissue damage generated by electrical stimulation, materials and material properties, and molecular functionalization of devices for interfacing with the nervous system. Several examples of the state-of-art neural interfaces will be analyzed and discussed. Recommended preparation: EBME 401. Prereq: Graduate standing or Undergraduate with Junior or Senior standing and a cumulative GPA of 3.2 or above.
EBME 410	Medical Imaging Fundamentals	3 Units	Physical principles of medical imaging. Imaging devices for x-ray, ultrasound, magnetic resonance, etc. Image quality descriptions. Patient risk. Recommended preparation: EBME 308 and EBME 310 or equivalent. Prereq: Graduate standing or Undergraduate with Junior or Senior standing and a cumulative GPA of 3.2 or above.
EBME 411	Underpinnings of the Extracellular Matrix	3 Units	Collagen is the most plentiful protein in the body. Every tissue that lays down basement membrane utilizes collagen to attach cells to the extracellular matrix. Collagen is a primary structural element of tissues ranging from bone, cartilage and tendon to arterial wall, sclera and skin. Many of the mechanisms currently under consideration to describe how mechanical forces are transduced into cellular activity require the forces to travel through collagenous structures on their way to the cells.  This class presents the fundamentals of collagenous tissues in a combined lecture/seminar format. Details at the molecular, fibrillar and whole tissue levels are presented. Applications ranging from how to obtain collagen molecules, to synthesizing gels for use in tissue engineering, to design and creation of collagen based materials for replacement and/or augmentation of several tissues are presented. A series of guest lectures by researchers currently using and/or developing collagen based materials are presented. Throughout the course, students choose articles of interest, present them to the class, and participate in discussions surrounding these presentations. The course concludes with a series of in-class presentations by the students who pick a specific application of interest to them and then demonstrate how the fundamentals presented in the first portion of the class play out in their application. While not required, it is recommended that students have an undergraduate course in biomaterials, two semesters of undergraduate biology, and organic chemistry. Prereq: Graduate Student standing.
EBME 416	Biomaterials for Drug Delivery	3 Units	The teaching objective is to provide students with a basic understanding of the principles of design and engineering of well-defined molecular structures and architectures intended for applications in controlled release and organ-targeted drug delivery.  The course will discuss the therapeutic basic of drug delivery based on drug pharmacodynamics and clinical pharmacokinetics.  Biomaterials with specialized structural and interfacial properties will be introduced to achieve drug targeting and controlled release.  Offered as EBME 316 and EBME 416. Prereq: EBME 306 and PHRM 309 or graduate standing.
EBME 419	Applied Probability and Stochastic Processes for Biology	3 Units	Applications of probability and stochastic processes to biological systems. Mathematical topics will include: introduction to discrete and continuous probability spaces (including numerical generation of pseudo random samples from specified probability distributions), Markov processes in discrete and continuous time with discrete and continuous sample spaces, point processes including homogeneous and inhomogeneous Poisson processes and Markov chains on graphs, and diffusion processes including Brownian motion and the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process.  Biological topics will be determined by the interests of the students and the instructor.  Likely topics include: stochastic ion channels, molecular motors and stochastic ratchets, actin and tubulin polymerization, random walk models for neural spike trains, bacterial chemotaxis, signaling and genetic regulatory networks, and stochastic predator-prey dynamics.  The emphasis will be on practical simulation and analysis of stochastic phenomena in biological systems.  Numerical methods will be developed using a combination of MATLAB, the R statistical package, MCell, and/or URDME, at the discretion of the instructor.  Student projects will comprise a major part of the course. Offered as BIOL 319, ECSE 319, MATH 319, SYBB 319, BIOL 419, EBME 419, MATH 419, PHOL 419, and SYBB 419.
EBME 421	Bioelectric Phenomena	3 Units	The goal of this course is to provide working knowledge of the theoretical methods that are used in the fields of electrophysiology and bioelectricity for both neural and cardiac systems.  These methods will be applied to describe, from a theoretical and quantitative perspective, the electrical behavior of excitable cells, the methods for recording their activity and the effect of applied electrical and magnetic fields on excitable issues.  A team modeling project will be required.  Recommended preparation: differential equations, circuits. Prereq: Graduate standing or Undergraduate with Junior or Senior standing and a cumulative GPA of 3.2 or above.
EBME 426	Nanomedicine	3 Units	Principles of the design and application of nanomedicine, including nanosized drug delivery systems, protein delivery systems, gene delivery systems and imaging probes.  Methods for bioconjugation and surface modifications.  Structure property relationships of nanosized biomaterials.  In vivo and intracellular transport, pharmacokinetics, biodistribution, drug release kinetics, and biocompatibility of various nanosized therapeutics and diagnostics.  Theranostics, image-guided drug delivery and therapy. Prereq: EBME 316 or EBME 416 or requisites not met permission
EBME 427	Movement Biomechanics and Rehabilitation	3 Units	Introduction to the basic biomechanics of human movement and applications to the design and evaluation of artificial devices intended to restore or improve movement lost due to injury or disease. Measurement techniques in movement biomechanics, including motion analysis, electromyography, and gait analysis. Design and use of upper and lower limb prostheses. Principles of neuroprostheses with applications to paralyzed upper and lower extremities. Term paper required. Recommended preparation: Consent of instructor and graduate standing. Prereq: Graduate standing or Undergraduate with Junior or Senior standing and a cumulative GPA of 3.2 or above.
EBME 431	Physics of Imaging	3 Units	Description of physical principles underlying the spin behavior in MR and Fourier imaging in multi-dimensions. Introduction of conventional, fast, and chemical-shift imaging techniques. Spin echo, gradient echo, and variable flip-angle methods. Projection reconstruction and sampling theorems. Bloch equations, T1 and T2 relaxation times, rf penetration, diffusion and perfusion. Flow imaging, MR angiography, and functional brain imaging. Sequence and coil design. Prerequisite may be waived with consent of instructor. Recommended preparation: PHYS 122 or PHYS 124 or EBME 410. Offered as EBME 431 and PHYS 431.
EBME 432	Quantitative Analysis of Physiological Systems	3 Units	Mathematical modeling and simulation of cellular, tissue, and organ systems: respiratory, renal, liver, cardiovascular, neural, and muscular.  Dynamic mass transport and reaction processes. Cellular metabolism.  Cardiac electrophysiology and regulation.  Excitable cells and tissue. Neural system integration, feedback, and control. Recommended Preparation: Differential Equations, Linear Algebra, MATLAB. Prereq: Graduate Status.
EBME 433	Advanced Topics for Physiological Systems Analysis	4 Units	Mathematical modeling and simulation of cellular, tissue, and organ systems: respiratory, renal, liver, cardiovascular, neural, and muscular. Dynamic mass transport and reaction processes. Cellular metabolism. Cardiac electrophysiology and regulation. Excitable cells and tissue. Neural system integration, feedback, and control. Multi-cellular dynamics, bone regeneration, cellular-biomaterial interactions, tracer kinetics, isotope analysis, biomechanical modeling of the heart, metabolic modeling, neural-muscular control, brain circuitry. Recommended Preparation: differential equations, linear algebra, MATLAB.
EBME 434	Methodologies for Modeling Physiological Systems	2 Units	This course focuses on mathematical modeling of biomedical systems with applications, such as drug delivery and imaging. Techniques for modeling and solving such problems include ordinary and partial differential equations, numerical integration and approximation methods, compartment modeling, parameter estimation, and stochastic models.  Recommended Preparation: differential equations, linear algebra, MATLAB. Prereq: Graduate standing.
EBME 435	Advanced Topics of Compartmental Modeling	1 Unit	Compartment modeling and simulation of cellular, tissue, and organ systems including dynamic mass transport and reaction processes, cellular metabolism, tracer analysis. Advanced topics on applications of compartmental modeling in biomedical research, including drug delivery, dynamic contrast imaging, tracer kinetics in metabolic research. Recommended Preparation: differential equations, linear algebra, MATLAB. Prereq: EBME 434.
EBME 436	Neuromuscular Physiology and Analysis	1 Unit	In biomedical engineering, it is important to understand both the anatomy and physiology of various critical systems. In addition, we can better develop advanced technology, as well as, gain a more complete insight and prediction about physiologic systems by developing and analyzing mathematical models about these systems. In this course focus will be applied to the neural and motor systems. The systems will be described from the perspective of the neural system and a message processing system. There are four main sections: 1) The fundamental principles of bioelectric cells; 2) The "inputs" or sensory systems; 3) The outputs or the muscular system; and 4) The processing system, including the autonomic system, central nervous system, and enteric nervous system. In each section representative mathematical models will be introduced. The course ranges for philosophical considerations to details models of somatosensory neuromuscular physiology. Prereq: EBME 434.
EBME 440	Translational Research for Biomedical Engineers	3 Units	Translational Research (TR) in the Biomedical Engineering context means translating laboratory discoveries or developments into improved health care.  Topics and activities include: Interdisciplinary teamwork and  communication; Research ethics and human subjects protection; Regulation and oversight of human subjects and animal research; Clinical validation study design and biostatistics; Intellectual property, technology transfer and commercialization; Physician shadowing; Attending Grand Rounds and Morbidity-Mortality conferences; Preparing IRB and IACUC protocols; Final integrative project. Prereq: Graduate standing or Undergraduate with Junior or Senior standing and a cumulative GPA of 3.2 or above.
EBME 446	Introduction to Regulatory Affairs	3 Units	This introductory course explores government oversight of devices and drugs, and the laws and regulations that apply to their development, testing and production. This course also examines the context in which regulations evolved; the structure of the FDA and its relationship with other regulatory agencies.  Class topics will include preclinical, clinical, regulatory, and marketing factors which influence commercialization of new medical products. Through lectures and class discussions, students will gain insight on clearance pathways for medical devices, drugs, and combination products, the understanding of which leads to the delivery of safe and effective healthcare products, including post-marketing surveillance.  It is expected that the knowledge gained from the course will be useful in allowing students to position various individual research projects into the broader context of product development, regulatory approval and eventual market access. Prereq: Graduate standing.
EBME 450	Biomedical Engineering Entrepreneurship	3 Units	Biomedical engineering entrepreneurship is a unique in its interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary scope. In this course we examine medical technology innovations in the context of (A) identifying unmet clinical needs, (B) the process of conducting an opportunity analysis for an investable concept, and (C) subsequent translation of these advances into the market This course will emphasize and explore a variety of issues related to innovation and entrepreneurship, demonstrating that there are not many "absolute truths," but there are numerous best practices and processes that create value.  Successful students will conclude this course with new knowledge and insight on biomedical technology and innovation, as well as having demonstrated measurable improvement in their critical thinking skills. Prereq: Graduate student standing.
EBME 451	Molecular and Cellular Physiology	3 Units	This course covers cellular and molecular basics for graduate students with little or no prior biology background.  The emphasis of EBME 451 is on the molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying physiological processes.  Structure-function relationship will be addressed throughout the course.  The primary goal of the course is to develop understanding of the principles of the physiological processes at molecular and cellular level and to promote independent thinking and ability to solve unfamiliar problems.  This course is no longer a core course of the Biomedical Engineering graduate curriculum but serves as a fundamentals course to prepare students for the graduate cellular and molecular physiology core. Prereq: Graduate standing.
EBME 454	Introduction to Grant and Fellowship Writing	1 Unit	This course is intended for first and possibly second year graduate students to learn how to write proposals, such as NSF Graduate Fellowship proposals.  Students will be instructed on how to plan their proposal, will go through a mentored proposal writing exercise, and will participate in peer review of their proposals. The course will take place only in the first half of the semester, at twice the normal frequency, since proposals are due in mid-semester (e.g. October). Prereq: Graduate standing.
EBME 460	Advanced Topics in NMR Imaging	3 Units	Frontier issues in understanding the practical aspects of NMR imaging.  Theoretical descriptions are accompanied by specific examples of pulse sequences, and basic engineering considerations in MRI system design.  Emphasis is placed on implications and trade-offs in MRI pulse sequence design from real-world versus theoretical perspectives. Recommended preparation: EBME 431 or PHYS 431. Offered as EBME 460 and PHYS 460. Prereq: Graduate standing or Undergraduate with Junior or Senior standing and a cumulative GPA of 3.2 or above.
EBME 461	Biomedical Image Processing and Analysis	3 Units	Principles of image processing and analysis with applications to clinical and biomedical research.  Topics include image filtering, registration, morphological processing, segmentation, classification, and 3D image visualization.  There will be interesting, realistic computer projects in Matlab.    Offered as EBME 361 and EBME 461. Prereq: EBME 401.
EBME 465	Biomedical Optical Imaging	3 Units	Fundamentals of biomedical optics (biophotonics) with a focus on concepts and instrumentation behind light-based imaging of biological tissues. Topics include: essentials of optics and photonics, light-tissue interactions, optical imaging, conventional and advanced microscopies, optical coherence tomography. Course will include hands-on labs and demonstrations. Prereq: EBME 308 and (Graduate standing or Undergraduate with Junior or Senior standing and a cumulative GPA of 3.2 or above) or Requisites Not Met permission.
EBME 467	Commercialization and Intellectual Property Management	3 Units	This interdisciplinary course covers a variety of topics, including principles of intellectual property and intellectual property management, business strategies and modeling relevant to the creation of start-up companies and exploitation of IP rights as they relate to biomedical-related inventions.  The goal of this course is to address issues relating to the commercialization of biomedical-related inventions by exposing law students, MBA students, and Ph.D. candidates (in genetics and proteomics) to the challenges and opportunities encountered when attempting to develop biomedical intellectual property from the point of early discovery to the clinic and market.  Specifically, this course seeks to provide students with the ability to value a given technological advance or invention holistically, focusing on issues that extend beyond scientific efficacy and include patient and practitioner value propositions, legal and intellectual property protection, business modeling, potential market impacts, market competition, and ethical, social, and healthcare practitioner acceptance.  During this course, law students, MBA students, and Ph.D. candidates in genomics and proteomics will work in teams of five (two laws students, two MBA students and one Ph.D. candidate), focusing on issues of commercialization and IP management of biomedical-related inventions.  The instructors will be drawn from the law school, business school, and technology-transfer office.  Please visit the following website for more information: fusioninnovate.com. Offered as EBME 467, ECSE 467, GENE 367, GENE 467, LAWS 5341, MGMT 467, and RGME 467.
EBME 471	Principles of Medical Device Design and Innovation	3 Units	Translational research leading to medical device innovation is highly interdisciplinary, requiring a systematic, structured approach to bringing new  medical technologies to market. This course provides the fundamental principles of the Biodesign innovation process, providing the student the essential tools to (A) identify unmet clinical needs, (B) create innovative medical device concepts that respond to a primary unmet need, and (C) understand the process for translating these concepts into the market. In short, the student learns the fundamental principles for the process of  identify, invent, implement in the field of Biodesign.  Students taking EBME 471 (distance learning) cannot register for EBME 472 BioDesign (on-site) as the core content is substantially similar.
EBME 472	BioDesign	3 Units	Medical device innovations that would have been considered science fiction a decade ago are already producing new standards of patient care.  Innovation leading to lower cost of care, minimally invasive procedures and shorter recovery times is equally important to healthcare business leaders, educators, clinicians, and policy-makers.  Innovation is a driver of regional economic development and wealth creation in organizational units ranging in size from the start-up to the Fortune 500 companies.  In a broader context, the pace of translational research leading to product and service innovation is highly interdisciplinary, thus, new products and services result from team efforts, marked by a systematic, structured approach to bringing new medical technologies to market and impacting patient care.  In this course we examine medical technology innovations in the context of (A) addressing unmet clinical needs, (B) the process of inventing new medical devices and instruments, and (C) subsequent implementation of these advances in patient care.  In short, the student learns the process of "identify, invent, implement" in the field of BioDesign. Offered as EBME 472, IIME 472 and SYBB 472.
EBME 473	Fundamentals of Clinical Information Systems	3 Units	Technology has played a significant role in the evolution of medical science and treatment.  While we often think about progress in terms of the practical application of, say, imaging to the diagnosis and monitoring of disease, technology is increasingly expected to improve the organization and delivery of healthcare services, too.  Information technology plays a key role in the transformation of administrative support systems (finance and administration), clinical information systems (information to support patient care), and decision support systems (managerial decision-making).  This introductory graduate course provides the student with the opportunity to gain insight and situational experience with clinical information systems (CIS).  Often considered synonymous with electronic medical records, the "art" of CIS more fundamentally examines the effective use of data and information technology to assist in the migration away from paper-based systems and improve organizational performance.  In this course we examine clinical information systems in the context of (A) operational and strategic information needs, (B) information technology and analytic tools for workflow design, and (C) subsequent implementation of clinical information systems in patient care.  Legal and ethical issues are explored.  The student learns the process of "plan, design, implement" through hands-on applications to select CIS problems, while at the same time gaining insights and understanding of the impacts placed on patients and health care providers. Offered as EBME 473, IIME 473 and SYBB 421.
EBME 474	Biotransport Processes	3 Units	Biomedical mass transport and chemical reaction processes.  Basic mechanisms and mathematical models based on thermodynamics, mass and momentum conservation.  Analytical and numerical methods to simulate in vivo processes as well as to develop diagnostic and therapeutic methods.  Applications include transport across membranes, transport in blood, tumor processes, bioreactors, cell differentiation, chemotaxis, drug delivery systems, tissue engineering processes.  Recommended preparation: EBME 350 or equivalent. Offered as EBME 474 and ECHE 474.
EBME 478	Computational Neuroscience	3 Units	Computer simulations and mathematical analysis of neurons and neural circuits, and the computational properties of nervous systems.  Students are taught a range of models for neurons and neural circuits, and are asked to implement and explore the computational and dynamic properties of these models.  The course introduces students to dynamical systems theory for the analysis of neurons and neural learning, models of brain systems, and their relationship to artificial and neural networks.  Term project required.  Students enrolled in MATH 478 will make arrangements with the instructor to attend additional lectures and complete additional assignments addressing mathematical topics related to the course.   Recommended preparation: MATH 223 and MATH 224 or BIOL 300 and BIOL 306. Offered as BIOL 378, COGS 378, MATH 378, BIOL 478, CSDS 478, EBME 478, ECSE 478, MATH 478 and NEUR 478.
EBME 480A	Introduction to Wireless Health	3 Units	Study of convergence of wireless communications, microsystems, information technology, persuasive psychology, and health care.  Discussion of health care delivery system, medical decision-making, persuasive psychology, and wireless health value chain and business models.  Understanding of health information technology, processing of monitoring data, wireless communication, biomedical sensing techniques, and health monitoring technical approaches and solutions. Offered as ECSE 480A and EBME 480A.
EBME 480B	The Human Body	3 Units	Study of structural organization of the body.  Introduction to anatomy, physiology, and pathology, covering the various systems of the body.  Comparison of elegant and efficient operation of the body and the related consequences of when things go wrong, presented in the context of each system of the body.  Introduction to medical diagnosis and terminology in the course of covering the foregoing. Offered as ECSE 480B and EBME 480B.
EBME 480C	Biomedical Sensing Instrumentation	3 Units	Study of principles, applications, and design of biomedical instruments with special emphasis on transducers. Understanding of basic sensors, amplifiers, and signal processing. Discussion of the origin of biopotential, and biopotential electrodes and amplifiers (including biotelemetry). Understanding of chemical sensors and clinical laboratory instrumentation, including microfluidics. Offered as ECSE 480C and EBME 480C. Prereq: EBME 480A and EBME 480B.
EBME 480D	The Health Care Delivery Ecosystem	3 Units	Health care delivery across the continuum of care in the United States, including health policy and reform, financing of care, comparative health systems, population health, public health, access to care, care models, cost and value, comparative effectiveness, governance, management, accountability, workforce, and the future.  Discussions of opportunities and challenges for wireless health, integrated into the foregoing topics.  Perspective on health care delivery in other countries. Offered as ECSE 480D and EBME 480D.
EBME 480E	Wireless Communications and Networking	3 Units	Essentials of wireless communications and networking, including teletraffic engineering, radio propagation, digital and cellular communications, wireless wide-area network architecture, speech and channel coding, modulation schemes, antennas, security, networking and transport layers, and 4G systems.  Hands-on learning of the anatomy of a cell phone, and a paired wireless health device and its gateway. Offered as ECSE 480E and EBME 480E.
EBME 480F	Physicians, Hospitals and Clinics	3 Units	Rotation through one or more health care provider facilities for a first-hand understanding of care delivery practice, coordination, and management issues.  First-hand exposure to clinical personnel, patients, medical devices and instruments, and organizational workflow.  Familiarity with provider protocols, physician referral practices, electronic records, clinical decision support systems, acute and chronic care, and inpatient and ambulatory care. Offered as ECSE 480F and EBME 480F.
EBME 480Q	Regulatory Policy and Regulations	3 Units	Introduction of wireless health technologies: spectrum, licensed versus unlicensed; personal area networks; body area networks; ultra-wideband low energy level short-range radios; wireless local area networks; wide area networks. The Federal system: separation of powers; the executive branch and its departments; the House of Representatives and its committees; the Senate and its committees; the FCC; policy versus regulatory versus legislative. What is a medical device: FDA; classification system; radiation-emitting products; software; RF in medical devices; converged medical devices; international aspects. Regulation of health information technology and wireless health: American Recovery and Reinvestment Act; Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act; FCC/FDA MoU; CMS and Reimbursement; privacy and security. Offered as ECSE 480Q and EBME 480Q.
EBME 480R	User Experience Engineering	3 Units	Social, cognitive, behavioral, and contextual elements in the design of healthcare technology and systems.  User-centered design paradigm from a broad perspective, exploring dimensions of product user experience and learning to assess and modify the design of healthcare technology. Practical utilization of user centered design method and assessment techniques for approaching a design problem. Offered as ECSE 480R and EBME 480R.
EBME 480S	Wireless Health Product Development	3 Units	Integrating application requirements, market data, concept formulation, design innovation, and manufacturing resources for creating differentiated wireless health products that delight the user.  Learning user-centric product development best practices, safety, security and privacy considerations, and risk management planning.  Understanding the regulatory process.  Identifying and managing product development tradeoffs. Offered as ECSE 480S and EBME 480S. Prereq: EBME 480R.
EBME 491	Introduction to Translational Health Technology	2 Units	Introduction to Translational Health Technology serves to orient students to the field of translational health and highlight specific product development philosophy, projects, and careers in the field.  This course of study is particularly helpful for those students enrolled in lock-step translational health specialty degree programs, so they are adequately coached and prepared for the "road ahead" in the translation of leading-edge research into patient care.  In addition to providing specific instructional elements, this course also helps students frame the type of capstone project they may wish to pursue as part of their degree program.  The course of study includes invited presentations by the existing graduate students to enable: (A) graduate students a chance to reflect on their research and project work and, (B) for new students to develop first-hand experience with the process of inquiry and debate relating to the field of translational health technology.
EBME 500T	Graduate Teaching II	0 Unit	This course will provide the Ph.D. candidate with experience in teaching undergraduate or graduate students. The experience is expected to consist of direct student contact, but will be based upon the specific departmental needs and teaching obligations. This teaching experience will be conducted under the supervision of the faculty member who is responsible for the course, but the academic advisor will the assess the educational plan to ensure that it provides an educational opportunity for the students. Recommended preparation: EBME 400T, BME Ph.D. student.
EBME 515	Grant Writing II	2 Units	This course introduces students to writing research proposals.  Students will be asked to write a short, concise proposal written according to this funding mechanism is thus appropriate for a student in the formative stages of his or her research project to acquire the skills for conceiving and writing a research proposal.  The research proposal can be hypothesis-driven or design-driven. It should include specific aims, Background and Significance (Narrative and Innovation), Approach (Research Strategy and Preliminary Results) and References.  The intent for the written proposal is to prepare students for the department's requirement of a written and associated oral presentation and defense to evaluate the ability of the student to formulate a research problem, to state hypotheses or outline design objectives, to propose a research plan using feasible design, experiment and analysis techniques to either test those hypotheses or achieve the design objectives, and to interpret data. While this proposal will often represent the research ultimately pursued by the student, it is recognized that the details of the proposal and even its goals may evolve significantly over time. Students who have or are writing fellowship proposals are encouraged to use the same concepts in this research proposal, but they should convert the material into the NIH R21 format and should include all of the required components. Prereq: EBME 454 and EBME 570.
EBME 570	Graduate Professional Development for Biomedical Engineers	1 Unit	Students will be trained in topics including public speaking, grant writing, notebook management, professionalism, etc. Prereq: Graduate standing.
EBME 600T	Graduate Teaching III	0 Unit	This course will provide the Ph.D. candidate with experience in teaching undergraduate or graduate students. The experience is expected to consist of direct student contact, but will be based upon the specific departmental needs and teaching obligations. This teaching experience will be conducted under the supervision of the faculty member who is responsible for the course, but the academic advisor will the assess the educational plan to ensure that it provides an educational opportunity for the students. Recommended preparation: EBME 500T, BME Ph.D. student.
EBME 601	Pre-candidacy Ph.D. Research	1 - 18 Units	Credit as arranged.
EBME 602	Special Topics	1 - 18 Units	Credit as arranged.
EBME 611	BME Departmental Seminar I	.5 Unit	Lectures by invited speakers on subjects of current interest in biomedical engineering.  Students will be evaluated on reading and preparation of questions for select speakers, as well as weekly participation.  Between this course and EBME 612 students must earn a minimum of 1 credit (two semesters) and can take up to 4 credits over eight different semesters.
EBME 612	BME Departmental Seminar II	.5 Unit	Lectures by invited speakers on subjects of current interest in biomedical engineering.  Students will be evaluated on reading and preparation of questions for select speakers, as well as weekly participation.  Between this course and EBME 611 students must earn a minimum of 1 credit (two semesters) and can take up to 4 credits over eight different semesters.
EBME 613	Topic Seminars for NeuroEngineering Students	.5 Unit	Lectures by students in the seminar series on subjects of current interest to biomedical engineering students in NeuroEngineering.  Students will be evaluated on presentation preparation and performance, as well as weekly participation.  Between this course and EBME 614 students must earn a minimum of 1 credit (two semesters) and can take up to 4 credits over eight different semesters. Prereq: Graduate standing.
EBME 614	Topic Seminars for NeuroEngineering Students	.5 Unit	Lectures by students in the seminar series on subjects of current interest to biomedical engineering students in NeuroEngineering.  Students will be evaluated on presentation preparation and performance, as well as weekly participation.  Between this course and EBME 613 students must earn a minimum of 1 credit (two semesters) and can take up to 4 credits over eight different semesters. Prereq: Graduate standing.
EBME 615	Topic Seminars for Imaging Students	.5 Unit	Lectures by students in the seminar series on subjects of current interest to biomedical engineering students in Imaging.  Students will be evaluated on presentation preparation and performance, as well as weekly participation.  Between this course and EBME 616 students must earn a minimum of 1 credit (two semesters) and can take up to 4 credits over eight different semesters. Prereq: Graduate standing.
EBME 616	Topic Seminars for Imaging Students	.5 Unit	Lectures by students in the seminar series on subjects of current interest to biomedical engineering students in Imaging.  Students will be evaluated on presentation preparation and performance, as well as weekly participation.  Between this course and EBME 615 students must earn a minimum of 1 credit (2 semesters) and can take up to 4 credits over eight different semesters. Prereq: Graduate standing.
EBME 617	Topic Seminars for Biomaterials Students	.5 Unit	Lectures by students in the seminar series on subjects of current interest to biomedical engineering students in Biomaterials.  Students will be evaluated on presentation preparation and performance, as well as weekly participation.  Between this course and EBME 618 students must earn a minimum of 1 credit (two semesters) and can take up to 4 credits over eight different semesters. Prereq: Graduate standing.
EBME 618	Topic Seminars for Biomaterials Students	.5 Unit	Lectures by students in the seminar series on subjects of current interest to biomedical engineering students in Biomaterials.  Students will be evaluated on presentation preparation and performance, as well as weekly participation.  Between this course and EBME 617 students must earn a minimum of 1 credit (two semesters) and can take up to 4 credits over eight different semesters. Prereq: Graduate standing.
EBME 619	Topic Seminars for Miscellaneous Biomedical Engineering Students	.5 Unit	Lectures by students in the seminar series on subjects of current interest to biomedical engineering students in outside of NeuroEngineering, Imaging, and Biomaterials.  Students will be evaluated on presentation preparation and performance, as well as weekly participation.  Between this course and EBME 620 students must earn a minimum of 1 credit (two semesters) and can take up to 4 credits over eight different semesters. Prereq: Graduate standing.
EBME 620	Topic Seminars for Miscellaneous Biomedical Engineering Students	.5 Unit	Lectures by students in the seminar series on subjects of current interest to biomedical engineering students on topics outside of NeuroEngineering, Imaging, and Biomaterials.  Students will be evaluated on presentation preparation and performance, as well as weekly participation.  Between this course and EBME 619 students must earn a minimum of 1 credit (2 semesters) and can take up to 4 credits over eight different semesters. Prereq: Graduate standing.
EBME 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
EBME 695	Project M.S.	1 - 9 Units	Research course taken by Plan B M.S. students. Prereq: Enrolled in the EBME Plan B MS Program.
EBME 700	Oral Qualifying Exam for Ph.D. Candidates	0 Unit	The objective of this course is to track: 1) the eligibility of students to take the exam, 2) the students' registration to take the exam, and 3) their results on the exam. Prereq: EBME 401D and EBME 433 with B or higher.
EBME 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	Ph.D. candidates only. Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
EBME 702	Research Competency: Research Proposal and Defense	0 Unit	The objective of this course is to track: 1) the eligibility of students to take the exam, 2) the students' registration to take the exam, and 3) their results on the exam. Prereq: EBME 700.
AKKD 101	Beginning Akkadian I	3 Units	This course is the first of a sequence of two courses intended to cover the fundamentals of Akkadian grammar and a large number of the most common cuneiform signs encountered. A sample of texts (tablets) from the most important genres of cuneiform literature will be read. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
AKKD 102	Beginning Akkadian II	3 Units	This course, the second in a two-semester sequence, completes the introduction to the grammar of Akkadian and the most common cuneiform signs. Via grammar and exercises, we will continue to familiarize ourselves with some of the more important genres of Akkadian writing as well as the history and culture of Mesopotamian civilization. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: AKKD 101.
AKKD 205	Readings from the Epic of Gilgamesh	3 Units	In this course, we will read the entire Standard Babylonian recension of the Epic of Gilgamesh, considered the first great work of literature, from the original Akkadian text. While the primary goal of the course will be to become proficient readers of Akkadian, we will take some excursus on topics such as Babylonian religion, whether Gilgamesh was a historical figure or not, how the text was put together, and its possible influence on later heroic traditions such as the Greco-Roman. Offered as AKKD 205, AKKD 405, WLIT 205 and WLIT 405. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: AKKD 101 and AKKD 102.
AKKD 395	Advanced Topics in Akkadian Literature	3 Units	Directed readings in selected Akkadian texts in the cuneiform script either of the Old Babylonian or the Neo-Assyrian periods to serve the individual interests and needs of students (texts may be drawn from a variety of text genres: mythological, historical, scientific, medical, correspondence, religious, etc.). Offered as AKKD 395, AKKD 495, WLIT 395 and WLIT 495. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: AKKD 101 and AKKD 102.
AKKD 405	Readings from the Epic of Gilgamesh	3 Units	In this course, we will read the entire Standard Babylonian recension of the Epic of Gilgamesh, considered the first great work of literature, from the original Akkadian text. While the primary goal of the course will be to become proficient readers of Akkadian, we will take some excursus on topics such as Babylonian religion, whether Gilgamesh was a historical figure or not, how the text was put together, and its possible influence on later heroic traditions such as the Greco-Roman. Offered as AKKD 205, AKKD 405, WLIT 205 and WLIT 405. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: AKKD 101 and AKKD 102.
AKKD 495	Advanced Topics in Akkadian Literature	3 Units	Directed readings in selected Akkadian texts in the cuneiform script either of the Old Babylonian or the Neo-Assyrian periods to serve the individual interests and needs of students (texts may be drawn from a variety of text genres: mythological, historical, scientific, medical, correspondence, religious, etc.). Offered as AKKD 395, AKKD 495, WLIT 395 and WLIT 495. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: AKKD 101 and AKKD 102.
BSTP 400	Research Rotation in Biomedical Sciences Training Program	0 - 9 Units	
BIOS 447	Regulatory Affairs for the Biosciences	1.5 Unit	This mini-course introduces students to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the laws and regulations it enforces. A scientific regulatory agency with far reaching enforcement authority, FDA is the most powerful consumer protection agency in the world. This course will familiarize students with FDA's mission, philosophy and organizational structure, as well as policy and procedure it uses to ensure the safety and effectiveness of the food, drugs, biologics, cosmetics, medical devices and radiation-emitting products it regulates. Recommended preparation: Enrollment in the MEM Biomedical Entrepreneurship Track. Offered as BIOS 447, HSMC 447, and IIME 447.
BUAI 400	Linear Algebra	1 Unit	The objective of this one-credit hour course is to provide a basic working knowledge of material in linear algebra that is relevant to the Master of Supply Chain Management and Master of Business Analytics & Intelligence programs. This background material includes geometric and algebraic properties of vectors and matrices together with operations that can be performed on them. The use of vectors and matrices in solving systems of linear equations is taught. Offered as BUAI 400 and SCMG 400. Prereq: For Master of Business Analytics & Intelligence students only.
BUAI 406A	Operations Management I	1.5 Unit	Operations managers, ranging from supervisors to vice presidents, are concerned with the production of goods and services.  More specifically, they are responsible for designing, running, controlling and improving the systems that accomplish production.  This course is a broad-spectrum course with emphasis on techniques helpful to the practice of management at the analyst level.  Its goal is to introduce you to the environments, to help you appreciate the problems that operations managers are confronted with, and provide you with the tools to address these problems.  Operations Management spans all value-adding activities of an organization including product and process design, production, service delivery, distribution network and customer order management.  As global competition in both goods and services increases, a firm's survival depends upon how well it structures its operations to respond quickly to changing consumer needs.  Thus, it is essential for all business managers to acquire an understanding of operations management to maintain their competitive advantage.  This course provides students with the basic tools needed to become an analyst in Supply Chain and Operations Management.  This course provides an overview of Process analysis, Capacity management, Queuing system and analysis. Prereq: For Master of Business Analytics & Intelligence students only.
BUAI 406B	Operations Management II	1.5 Unit	Operations managers, ranging from supervisors to vice presidents, are concerned with the production of goods and services.  More specifically, they are responsible for designing, running, controlling and improving the systems that accomplish production.  This course is a broad-spectrum course with emphasis on techniques helpful to the practice of management at the analyst level.  Its goal is to introduce you to the environments, to help you appreciate the problems that operations managers are confronted with, and provide you with the tools to address these problems.  Operations Management spans all value-adding activities of an organization including product and process design, production, service delivery, distribution network and customer order management.  As global competition in both goods and services increases, a firm's survival depends upon how well it structures its operations to respond quickly to changing consumer needs.  Thus, it is essential for all business managers to acquire an understanding of operations management to maintain their competitive advantage. This course provides an overview of Quality management, Material Requirements planning, Inventory management, and Supply Chain management.  The emphasis of the course is on both real world applications and technical problem solving.  Several manufacturing and non-manufacturing environments will be discussed explicitly, like health care, insurance, hotel-management, airlines and government related operations.  Also we will explore the interface of operations management with other functional areas such as marketing, finance, accounting, etc.  This coursework includes individual and group assignments, case analyses and experiential learning through simulations and educational games. Prereq: For Master of Business Analytics & Intelligence students only.
BUAI 407A	Managerial Marketing I	1.5 Unit	This course is  part one of the Core Marketing Management class, as taught in typical MBA programs, including our own. Marketing management is defined as the 'art and science of choosing target markets and getting, keeping, and growing customers through creating, delivering, and communicating superior customer value' (Kotler and Keller 2012, p. 3). This course addresses the management challenges of developing products and services that profitably deliver value including selecting target markets and designing the best combination of marketing variables to carry out a firm's strategy.
BUAI 407B	Managerial Marketing II	1.5 Unit	This course is  part one of the Core Marketing Management class, as taught in typical MBA programs, including our own. Marketing management is defined as the 'art and science of choosing target markets and getting, keeping, and growing customers through creating, delivering, and communicating superior customer value' (Kotler and Keller 2012, p. 3). This course addresses the management challenges of developing products and services that profitably deliver value including selecting target markets and designing the best combination of marketing variables to carry out a firm's strategy. Prereq or Coreq: BUAI 407A.
BUAI 411	Operations Analytics: Deterministic	3 Units	The first half of the course provides a practical coverage of linear programming, a special type of mathematical model.  The art of formulating linear programs is taught through the use of systematic model-building techniques.  The simplex algorithm for solving these models is developed from several points of view: geometric, conceptual, algebraic, and economic.  The role and uses of duality theory are also presented.  Students learn to obtain and interpret a solution from a computer package and how to use the associated output to answer "What-happens-if..." questions that arise in post-optimality analysis.  Specific topics include: problem formulation, geometric and conceptual solution procedures, the simplex algorithm (phase 1 and phase 2), obtaining and interpreting computer output, duality theory, and sensitivity analysis.  The second half of this course provide a practical approach to formulating and solving combinatorial optimization problems in the areas of networks, dynamic programming, project management (CPM), integer programming, and nonlinear programming.  The art of formulating problems, understanding what is involved in solving them, and obtained and interpreting the solution from a computer package are shown.  A comparison with formulating and solving linear programming problems is provided as a way to understand the advantages and disadvantages of some of these problems and solutions procedures.  Recommended preparation: Knowledge of Excel, one semester each of undergraduate linear algebra and undergraduate calculus (derivatives); or consent of instructor. Prereq: For Master of Business Analytics & Intelligence students only.
BUAI 432	Operations Analytics: Stochastic	3 Units	This course covers modeling and analysis of discrete-event dynamical systems using computer simulations. Topics include an introduction to simulation as a modeling tool, with emphasis on understanding the structure of a simulation model and how to build such models, model validation, random number generation, simulation languages, statistical simulation output analysis, design of simulation experiments and selected current research topics. Prereq: BUAI 433 or MSBA 433. Prereq or Coreq: BUAI 406A and BUAI 406B.
BUAI 433	Foundations of Probability and Statistics	3 Units	Data of many kinds are typically available in practice, but the challenge is to use those data to make effective professional decisions.  This software-intensive course begins with useful descriptions of data and the probability theory foundation on which statistics rests.  It continues to statistics, including the central limit theorem, which explains why data often appear to be normally distributed, and the Palm-Khintchine theorem which explains why data often appear to have a Poisson distribution.  The remainder of the course focuses on regression and forecasting, including detecting and overcoming some of the deadly sins of regression, and the surprising flexibility of regression models.  Recommended preparation: One semester of undergraduate calculus or consent of instructor. Prereq: For Master of Business Analytics & Intelligence students only.
BUAI 434	Data Mining & Visualization	3 Units	Data Mining is the process of identifying new patterns and insights in data. As the volume of data collected and stored in databases grows, there is a growing need to provide data summarization (e.g., through visualization), identify important patterns and trends, and act upon the findings. Insight derived from data mining can provide tremendous economic value, often crucial to businesses looking for competitive advantages. This course is a survey of data visualization methods, supervised and unsupervised learning techniques, and modern tools for discovering knowledge for business decisions. Prereq or Coreq: BUAI/MSBA 433 or SCMG/MSOR 433 or OPRE 433.
BUAI 435	Marketing Models and Digital Analytics	3 Units	Models & analytics suitable for digital marketing data are the focus of this course.  The objective to develop analytical skills for making intelligent decisions about marketing investments that create value and build competitive advantage. In short, to build capabilities for marketing ai-analytics for insights. The course content and assignments are designed to (a) enable student learning by using real- world problems and data, (b) emphasize the Problem-Data-Analytics interdependence for effective problem solving, and (c) engage with thoughtful practitioners of digital data analytics to inform current practices and opportunities. Prereq or Coreq: MBAC 506 or BUAI/MSBA 407A.  Prereq: BUAI/MSBA 433 or SCMG/MSOR 433 or OPRE433.
BUAI 444	Predictive Modeling	3 Units	Predictive modeling is a set of procedures and tools for hypothesizing, testing and validating a model to explain and predict the probability or likelihood of a future event, or outcome.  A wide range of procedures and tools are available for predictable modeling, and this course will cover a select set of topics with wide applicability.  Through applications and case studies involving real-life data, the course will emphasize managerial problem solving.  To build models is to capture managerial problem formulation, and to test/validate them is to confront managerial hypotheses with empirical observations.  Problem solving is a creative act rooted in validated evidence of managerial hypotheses testing. Prereq or Coreq: BUAI/MSBA 433 or SCMG/MSOR 433 or OPRE 433.
BUAI 445	Advanced Marketing Analytics	3 Units	In order to improve decision making in various decision areas of marketing like segmentation, positioning, advertising, promotions, new product development and pricing, use of quantitative data and analysis has become very popular. It is increasingly common for marketing managers to be challenged by top managers, to show the value of marketing expenditures to an organization's financial well-being. This course will introduce a variety of data based decision-aids in the marketing area that will often focus on those metrics. In addition, the course will also introduce SAS to you. SAS is a very popular tool that analysts in business and economics field have been using for decades now, and has the potential to open some doors for you when it comes to internships and jobs. In order to improve decision making in various decision areas of marketing like segmentation, positioning, advertising, promotions, new product development and pricing, use of quantitative data and analysis has become very popular. It is increasingly common for marketing managers to be challenged by top managers, to show the value of marketing expenditures to an organization's financial well-being. This course will introduce a variety of data based decision-aids in the marketing area that will often focus on those metrics. In addition, the course will also introduce SAS to you. SAS is a very popular tool that analysts in business and economics field have been using for decades now, and has the potential to open some doors for you when it comes to internships and jobs. The course will also use Python in parallel to re-emphasize what you have already learnt in previous classes. Prereq or Coreq: BUAI/MSBA 407A or MBAC 506.  Prereq: (BUAI/MSBA 433 or OPRE 433 or SCMG/MSOR 433) and (BUAI 492 or MSOR 492 or BTEC 420).
BUAI 446	Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence in Business Analytics	3 Units	Advances in computational analytics including Machine, Deep and Statistical Learning (ML) provide powerful methods for developing mathematical "learning" models that can autonomously parse, learn from, and make predictions from data to improve performance with "experience".  In deep learning, large neural networks are leveraged to achieve artificial intelligence (AI), enabling machines to mimic human behavior. This course covers principles, algorithms, and applications of machine learning from a business analytics perspective.  Specifically, the course will provide a practical understanding of modern machine learning techniques including regression and classification methods, resampling methods and model selection, regularization, perceptron and artificial neural networks, tree-based methods, support vector machines and kernel methods, and grouping methods. Prereq or Coreq: BUAI/MSBA 434 or BUAI/MSBA 444.  Prereq: Master of Business Analytics & Intelligence students only and (BUAI/MSBA 492 or SCMG/MSOR 492 or BTEC 420).
BUAI 485B	Team Development	1.5 Unit	This course is unique in the sense that its primary focus is on the student working in teams.  In this course the student will assess their team interaction based on team assignments simulated and action learning type projects, presenting to the class as a team, engaging in various experiential activities, participating one team coaching session, working with a team, and expanding their knowledge of team leadership and membership skills and abilities.  They are also expected to engage with projects external to the university (similar to an action learning project).
BUAI 492	Foundations of Python Programming	1.5 Unit	Python is an object-oriented programming language that can interact with the world wide web as well as Excel and other programming languages like VBA. As such, Python has gained popularity and is becoming an industry standard in many areas, including supply chain management. In addition to assignment, if/then, and for/while statements, in this course you will learn about object-oriented programming and how to implement those ideas with appropriate data structures. You will also learn how to use libraries that others have created, such as Numpy for numerical calculations (like working with vectors, matrices, and solving systems of linear equations). In addition to individual homeworks, you will solve an assigned project in groups and make a final presentation to the class with PowerPoint. Being able to communicate your model and results is part of learning to work effectively with others in an organization, which is a goal of the supply chain program. All of this is designed to enable you to build and solve models that help organizations make good decisions. Offered as BUAI 492 and SCMG 492. Prereq: For Master of Business Analytics & Intelligence students only.
BUAI 499	Capstone Project in Business Analytics	0 Unit	This course is focused on engaging Master of Business Analytics students in a capstone experience.  Students will be provided with analytics problems with data from local companies and will be asked to leverage the broad range of skills, tools and approaches introduced throughout the program to analyze the data.  They will also present a final report to the sponsoring organization. Prereq: For Master of Business Analytics & Intelligence students only.
BLAW 331	Legal Environment of Management	3 Units	This course will provide an overview of the legal environment in which business transactions take place.  Through coverage of a number of topical areas, the student will be given a broad understanding of how the law impacts upon the daily decisions of managers. More specifically, the student will be better able to identify and understand how the legal issues facilitate or hinder the conduct of business. Topics covered will include contracts, property, products' liability, employment law, and corporate law. Special emphasis is placed on those regulatory areas of greatest interest to modern business. Offered as BLAW 331 and BLAW 417.
BLAW 411	Business and Law Colloquium	3 Units	This course will bring together law students, business students, mid-level attorneys and senior leaders in the legal field for a one-semester weekly colloquium.    Even though women have represented approximately half of law-school graduates for a number of years, women represent only 16% of law firm equity partners and even fewer corporate General Counsels. This course aims to offer an introduction to the business skills that both women and men will need to rise to the highest levels of law practice and organizational leadership. Each week will focus on a different aspect of law and business. The curriculum will include sessions focused in financial management, business development, communication skills, and intercultural business and law practices. Offered as LAWS 5432 and BLAW 411.
BLAW 417	Legal Environment of Management	3 Units	This course will provide an overview of the legal environment in which business transactions take place.  Through coverage of a number of topical areas, the student will be given a broad understanding of how the law impacts upon the daily decisions of managers. More specifically, the student will be better able to identify and understand how the legal issues facilitate or hinder the conduct of business. Topics covered will include contracts, property, products' liability, employment law, and corporate law. Special emphasis is placed on those regulatory areas of greatest interest to modern business. Offered as BLAW 331 and BLAW 417.
BTEC 400	Responsible and Ethical Digital Innovation Project Practicum	3 Units	Digital innovation is one of the most important strategic topics in today's business. As our society continues to move deeply into a digital economy and companies are able to use more powerful algorithms and models to analyze detailed digital trace data from users, responsible and ethical considerations are no longer after-thoughts but should be the strategic focus of any firm that is trying to innovate with digital technology. This is a project-based course where students learn the practice of responsible and ethical digital innovations using the latest digital tools. Responsible and ethical digital innovations (REDIs) require the blend of five core skill sets: (a) technical skills in emerging digital technology (such as artificial intelligence, mobile and wearable technology, crypto computing, cloud-based micro-service architecture, and the Internet of Things), (b) an ability to gain deeper insights on user needs through human-centered design thinking and translate them into a set of design features, (c) a robust understanding on technical, legal, and business dimensions of responsible and ethical digital innovations, (d) an ability to design an innovative business model and build a robust financial model, and (e) an ability to lead an agile team of diverse members for continuous service delivery. Each of these skills needs to be supported through a set of digital tools and frameworks that are specifically designed to support to support responsible and ethical digital innovation practices. Any responsible and ethical digital innovation projects must begin with deep user research with ethnographic research methods, a careful analysis of the current value network, legal and technical analyses of ethical requirements of the key features, an agile development process of prototypes and experimentations to build a minimally viable product (MVP), and financial modeling of the business model based on robust market research. It requires collaborations across user research, UX design, front-end development for mobile and web, back-end development, cloud architecture, and increasingly mechanical engineering. In this course, students will have a unique learning opportunity to learn the actual contemporary digital innovation practice, working on real-world projects in a small agile multi-disciplinary team. The goal is to equip students with the necessary technical and managerial skills. The target audience is the students who want to become product strategists, product managers, product owners, agile scrum masters, UX designers, full-stack developers, or digital innovation consultants. All projects are client funded and students are primarily responsible to meet the client's requirements within a semester. Students will be assigned to a multi-disciplinary team of 6-8 students (following Amazon's two-pizza rule). Students are expected to spend 2 - 3 hours per week in regular team meetings and workshops. In addition, each student is expected to work 3 - 5 hours either individually or in a small team to complete their individual tasks. Students are led by co-instructors including a faculty member who has domain expertise for the project and an industry coach who manage the agile project. The faculty will serve as the project executive. The coach will serve as the project manager initially with a student apprentice who will play a larger role in managing the project. Students are expected to pick up necessary technical tools and resources, self-taught, and use it for the project. If necessary, xLab will provide technical support by connecting students to technical experts or online resources. In general, students have a basic understanding of the necessary technological frameworks so that they can learn specific tools that they are required to use for the project.
BTEC 420	Introduction to Programming for Business Applications	3 Units	Goals: This course will introduce students to the basics of programming logic utilizing the Python programming language and environment. The course will help students understand how to apply programming solutions and related algorithmic thinking to solve common business and decision problems. This class is a great introduction into programming logic, it just happens to use Python. This course will teach the fundamentals of programming logic, which could be applied to any programming language available today or into the future. Learning Objectives:  Upon completion of this course students should have a foundational knowledge of how to use variables, operators, manipulate strings, loops, functions, and basic array manipulation all through Python programming language.  The course will culminate with a final project where students will be divided into groups with each group solving a different small business problem. The final submission will require a joint white paper submission that demonstrates the following learned objectives: problem research, scope, architect, and design a potential solution using python environment. A sample of the implemented Python code that was used to solve this problem will be required for final submission. Course Requirements: Each student must have access to a computer that can be brought to class. No programming experience is required. Downloading and installing Python is covered at the start of the course. Basic computer skills: surfing websites, running programs, saving and opening documents, etc. Offered as BTEC 420 and DESN 210.
BTEC 493	Blockchains, Cryptocurrencies, and Cryptoventures	3 Units	It behooves today's business leaders to be well acquainted with blockchain technologies and AI, two seemingly disparate technologies that have the potential to fundamentally disrupt a wide range of businesses. The popularity of blockchain technologies has increased exponentially since the release of bitcoin in 2009. While bitcoins garnered a lot of attention during the initial days, the focus has shifted over time to the underlying technology: blockchain. This wildly innovative technology has made possible tasks that were hitherto deemed implausible: validate ownership in a digital asset, verify the true state of a transaction without relying on a costly intermediary etc. Accurate predictions and sound judgements are two critical ingredients of any decision making process. While the jury is still out on whether algorithms can make sound judgements, recent developments in a field called machine learning (and its sub-field, deep learning) have led to dramatic improvements in the accuracy of predictions made by these algorithms. Significantly, this gain in accuracy has been accompanied by a reduction in overall costs. These in turn have spurred the recent interest in AI. Organizations that have enabled AI at the enterprise level appear to be making more informed decisions and innovating new products. In this course, we will unpack these technologies and examine a wide range of relevant business use cases. Our objective is to provide a practical introduction to these key technologies and their business implications. We focus on business perspectives, rather than on the technical dimensions. Fittingly, this course is open to all graduate students of Weatherhead School (MBA and all specialty Masters). Students are not expected to have any specific programming background; however, a basic understanding of statistics is required to better appreciate the discourse on Artificial Intelligence.  Offered as BTEC 493, FNCE 493 and FTEC 493. Prereq or Coreq: MBAC 504 or MBAP 405.
BTEC 494	Artificial Intelligence for Financial Modeling	3 Units	This is a hands-on course on Artificial Intelligence (A.I.) where the emphasis is not only on understanding the theoretical underpinnings of various AI models but also on building, evaluating, and critiquing A.I. models as they apply to the finance industry. This course begins with an introduction of Machine Learning models; various key ideas such as bias-variance tradeoff, cross-validation, regularization techniques are introduced with relevant examples from Finance. The course then proceeds to discuss Artificial Neural Networks and its relevance to Deep Learning. Foundational ideas such as back-propagation are discussed in sufficient detail; we also lay a lot of emphasis on evaluating the performance of all these models. A key objective of this course is help students build cutting-edge A.I. models that are ready for prime time, i.e., real-life applications. Fittingly, we work with several real-life datasets and case studies from banking and finance. We will work with three case studies, each of which span multiple sessions. -In the first case study, students use Machine Learning algorithms to understand how imbalanced datasets are handled in real-life. -In the second study, students use time series data and learn not only about the power of regularization techniques but also to highlight the prominence of A.I. in financial markets. -In the third case study, students learn how to use cutting-edge Deep Learning models to extract sentiments from disparate news sources; these are in turn used to generate trading strategies. By contrasting the effort that goes into and the payoff obtained from Machine Learning and Deep Learning models, students gain an intuitive appreciation of both these classes of models. Offered as BTEC 494 or FNCE 494.
CNCR 501	Translational Cancer Research A	1 Unit	In this course Case K12 Paul Calabresi Scholars will learn about the steps to receive an IRB approval for their research proposal and clinical trials; how to design and conduct clinical trials-designing a protocol, developing a research question, the purpose of the LOI, funding and budge issues, working with pharmaceutical companies; essential writing skills for successfully submitting a manuscript for publication in a peer reviewed journal.  The class will discuss Social Intelligence and the Biology of Leadership by Goleman and Boyatzis; the scholars will learn about the Case Cancer Center Core Facilities services and resources which are available for their research projects.  Topics also include the expectations of the K12 CORP program and essential elements for advancing their academic and research career.  Recommended preparation: Acceptance to Case K12 Clinical Oncology Career Development Training Program as Paul Calabresi Research Scholar.
CNCR 502	Translational Cancer Research B	1 Unit	In this course Case K12 Paul Calabresi Scholars will learn how to manage clinical trials; including staffing, multi or single site, contracting issues, translation and incorporation of laboratory research/correlative science into clinical trials design, getting involved with ECOG.  The scholars will learn about mentored and independent funding resources, how to select the appropriate mechanism, and strategies for successful grant submissions and resubmissions.  They will learn how to present research and clinical trials progress orally and written to peers/faculty for evaluation my making two PowerPoint presentations: on to the class and their two K12 mentors and a second to the K12 CORP Advisory Committee for written evaluation.  Both of these sections will be videotaped and a copy of the tape will be reviewed with the scholar.  Each scholar will also provide a written summary of their research to date along with their goals for the next 12 months on April 1.  Recommended preparation: Acceptance to Case K12 Clinical Oncology Career Development Training Program as Paul Calabresi Research Scholar.
CNCR 503	Translational Cancer Research C	1 Unit	In this course each Case K12 Paul Calabresi Scholar will present a summary of their experience from attending either the ASCO/AACR or ASH Clinical Trial Protocol Writing Workshop; two sessions will cover how to write a research proposal-hypothesis, specific aims, methods, and study design.  Each scholar will write a sample research proposal which will be critiqued by the other members of the class; two sessions will cover the organization and analysis of biostatistic data used in research.  One of these sessions will be a working session based on the scholar's own data.  The scholars will learn about the essential components and issues in developing a successful career in clinical and translational research. Recommended preparation: Acceptance to Case K12 Clinical Oncology Career Development Training Program as Paul Calabresi Research Scholars.
CNCR 504	Translational Cancer Research D	1 Unit	In this course Case K12 Paul Calabresi Scholars will discuss an article on essential components of leadership in an academic and clinical setting; how to advance their clinical research career to the level that they can present at the ASCO national conference; learn how to present research and clinical trials progress orally and written to peers/faculty for evaluation by making two PowerPoint presentations: one to the class and their two K12 mentors and a second to the K12 CORP Advisory Committee for written evaluation.  Both of these sessions will be videotaped and a copy of the tape will be reviewed with the scholar.  Each scholar will also provide a written summary of their research and date along with their goals for the next 12 months on April 1.  Recommended preparation: Acceptance to Case K12 Clinical Oncology Career Development Training Program as Paul Calabresi Research Scholar.
CLBY 416	Fundamental Immunology	4 Units	Introductory immunology providing an overview of the immune system, including activation, effector mechanisms, and regulation.  Topics include antigen-antibody reactions, immunologically important cell surface receptors, cell-cell interactions, cell-mediated immunity, innate versus adaptive immunity, cytokines, and basic molecular biology and signal transduction in B and T lymphocytes, and immunopathology. Three weekly lectures emphasize experimental findings leading to the concepts of modern immunology. An additional recitation hour is required to integrate the core material with experimental data and known immune mediated diseases. Five mandatory 90 minute group problem sets per semester will be administered outside of lecture and recitation meeting times. Graduate students will be graded separately from undergraduates, and 22 percent of the grade will be based on a critical analysis of a recently published, landmark scientific article.   Offered as BIOL 316, BIOL 416, CLBY 416, PATH 316 and PATH 416. Prereq: Graduate standing.
CLBY 435	Seminar in Molecular Biology/Microbiology	1 Unit	Graduate students will attend the departmental seminar given by all graduate students in the Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, in the Molecular Virology Program, and in the Cell Biology Program, as well as give a seminar on their own thesis research.  Students will be evaluated by the faculty member in charge of that student's seminar with input from the students' own thesis committee.  After each seminar, the student presenter will meet with other graduate students for peer-review of the content, delivery, and style of the seminar.  Peer reviewers will also be evaluated for the quality of their input. Offered as CLBY 435 and MBIO 435 and MVIR 435.
CLBY 450	Cells and Pathogens	3 Units	Modern molecular cell biology owes a great debt to viral and bacterial pathogens as model systems.  In some instances pathogens operate by faithful mimicry of host proteins, and other cases represent the result of extensive molecular tinkering and convergent evolution.  This course will also explore numerous mechanisms utilized by pathogens to subvert the host and enhance their own survival.  Topics covered include nuclear regulatory mechanisms, protein synthesis and stability, membrane-bound organelles, endocytosis and phagocytosis, and factors that influence cell behavior such as cytoskeleton rearrangements, cell-cell interactions, and cell migration.  Additional topics include cell signaling and co-evolution of pathogens and host cell functions.  Students are expected to come to class prepared to discuss pre-assigned readings consisting of brief reviews and seminal papers from the literature.  Student assessment will be based on effective class participation (approximately 80%) and successful presentation of an independent research topic (approximately 20%). Offered as CLBY 450, MBIO 450, and MVIR 450. Prereq: CBIO 453 and CBIO 455 or permission of instructor.
CLBY 454	Biochemistry and Biology of RNA	3 Units	Systematic overview of RNA biochemistry and biology. Course provides solid foundation for understanding processes of post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression. Topics include: RNA structure, RNA types, RNA-protein interactions, eukaryotic RNA metabolism including mRNA processing, ribosome biogenesis, tRNA metabolism, miRNA processing and function, bacterial RNA metabolism, transcriptomics. BIOC 454 requires an additional research proposal.  Recommended preparation for BIOC 354: Undergraduate Biology (1 semester minimum), equivalents of CHEM 301, BIOC 307 or BIOC 308. Offered as BIOC 354, BIOC 454 and CLBY 454.
CLBY 466	Cell Signaling	3 Units	This is an advanced problem set and research paper-based discussion format course that covers cell signaling mechanisms; there are no lectures.  Included are discussions of neurotransmitter-gated ion channels, growth factor receptor kinases, cytokine receptors, G protein-coupled receptors, steroid receptors, heterotrimeric G proteins, ras family GTPases, second messenger cascades, protein kinase cascades, second messenger regulation of transcription factors, signals for regulation of cell growth, division, tissue development and cell death. Offered as CLBY 466, NEUR 466, PHOL 466 and PHRM 466.
CLBY 488	Yeast Genetics and Cell Biology	3 Units	This seminar course provides an introduction to the genetics and molecular biology of the yeasts S. cerevisiae and S. pombe by a discussion of current literature focusing primarily on topics in yeast cell biology. Students are first introduced to the tools of molecular genetics and special features of yeasts that make them important model eukaryotic organisms. Some selected topics include cell polarity, cell cycle, secretory pathways, vesicular and nuclear/cytoplasmic transport, mitochondrial import and biogenesis, chromosome segregation, cytoskeleton, mating response and signal transduction.  Offered as CLBY 488, GENE 488, MBIO 488, and PATH 488.
CLBY 525	Neurodegenerative Diseases of the Brain and the Eye: Molecular Basis of the Brain-Eye Connection	3 Units	This is a graduate-level seminar course that familiarizes students with common neurodegenerative conditions of the brain and the eye. The molecular basis of each disorder and associated ophthalmic pathology will be emphasized. Contribution of heavy metals in brain and ocular pathology will be discussed where appropriate. Specific examples include Alzheimer's Disease, Parkinson's Disease, prion disorders, Huntington's Disease, age-related macular degeneration, glaucoma, and others based on popular demand. The students will be expected to discuss relevant research publications in class in an interactive format. Grading will be based on class participation and completion of an R21 grant proposal. Concurrent enrollment in PATH 526 on grant writing skills is strongly recommended but not required.  Offered as PATH 525 and CLBY 525.
CLBY 526	Cell Biology and Human Disease	3 Units	This course is designed to provide broad base of knowledge regarding cell structure and function.  The basic structure of the cell will be discussed, as will the various functional systems that are superimposed upon and interact with this structure.  The course will discuss organelle biogenesis, materials movement inside cells, cell interaction with the external environment, cell cycle and cell death regulation, cytoskeleton dynamics, quality control mechanisms, and basic signal transduction concepts.  The course will also discuss how abnormal cell function may lead to human disease, and how basic cell function may be harnessed by intracellular pathogens to provide favorable intracellular environments for replication.  The major goals of this course are to provide students with a working knowledge of the cell to facilitate understanding of the scientific literature, and to familiarize students with modern experimental approaches in cell biology.  The course will rely heavily on student participation.  Students will be provided with study guides with the expectation they will come to class prepared to lead interactive group discussions with minimal input from instructors. Offered as CLBY 526, MBIO 526 and MVIR 526.
CLBY 601	Special Problems	1 - 18 Units	This is the listing for independent research. Students should enroll in this course once they have selected their laboratory for Ph.D. research. The number of credit hours depends on how many didactic courses they are following at the same time. Once they have passed their qualifying examination they should register for CLBY 701.
CLBY 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	This is the listing for independent research toward the Ph.D. The number of credit hours depends on how many didactic courses students are following at the same time. Students may register for this course only once they have passed their qualifying examination. Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
ECHE 151	Introduction to Chemical Engineering at Case	1 Unit	An introduction to the profession of chemical engineering, its practice in industry, and review of the challenges and opportunities for the profession.  The academic programs and curricular enhancements available to students majoring in chemical engineering at CWRU, including breadth sequence sequences and concentrations, undergraduate research, international study opportunities, cooperative education and internships, are presented.  In addition to introducing the chemical engineering faculty and their research, a number of guest speakers representing the broad professional opportunities discuss career options with the students.  Through lectures and discussions, students are also introduced to topics such as professionalism and ethics.  Upperclassmen students conduct their co-op debriefing in the class, sharing experiences and initiating networking. In the lab/recitation section, students in smaller groups conduct experiments on chemical processes, spanning different aspects of the profession, and run computer-based simulations of those experiments.  Analysis and discussion of the results will follow.  Chemical engineering upperclassmen serve as teaching assistants.
ECHE 250	Honors Research I	1 - 3 Units	A special program which affords a limited number of students the opportunity to conduct research under the guidance of one of the faculty. At the end of the first semester of the sophomore year, students who have a strong interest in research are encouraged to discuss research possibilities with the faculty. Assignments are made based on mutual interest. Subject to the availability of funds, the faculty employs students through the summers of their sophomore and junior years, as members of their research teams.
ECHE 251	Honors Research II	1 - 3 Units	(See ECHE 250.) Recommended preparation: ECHE 250.
ECHE 260	Introduction to Chemical Systems	3 Units	Material and energy balances.  Conservation principles and the elementary laws of physical chemistry applied to chemical processes.  Developing skills in quantitative formulation and solution of word problems. Prereq: Sophomore Standing and (CHEM 111 OR CHEM 106). Prereq or Coreq: MATH 122 or MATH 124.
ECHE 305	Topics in Chemical Engineering	1 - 3 Units	Topics in chemical engineering will be covered in an independent study mode. Readings and homework assignments will be assigned. Students are graded on the basis of homework assignments and a final exam.
ECHE 313	Statistical Analysis of Chemical Processes	3 Units	This course covers the role of statistics in chemical processes. Topics include probability/probability plots, descriptive tools, statistical decision rules, strategies for experimentation with multiple factors, design of experiments, basic factorial experiments, regression analysis, screening designs, and optimization experiments. Basic statistical software will be used throughout the class. Prereq: MATH 126 or MATH 223.
ECHE 340	Biochemical Engineering	3 Units	Chemical engineering principles applied to biological and biochemical systems and related processes. Microbiology and biochemistry linked with transport phenomena, kinetics, reactor design and analysis, and separations. Specific examples of microbial and enzyme processes of industrial significance. Recommended preparation: BIOC 307, BIOL 343 and ECHE 364, or permission of instructor.
ECHE 350	Undergraduate Research Project I	3 Units	This course affords a student the opportunity to conduct research under the guidance of one of the faculty, as part of the Chemical Engineering Research breadth elective sequence.  Students who have a strong interest in research are encouraged to discuss research possibilities with the faculty.  Assignments are made based on mutual interest.
ECHE 351	Undergraduate Research Project II	3 Units	This course affords a student the opportunity to conduct research under the guidance of one of the faculty, as part of the Chemical Engineering Research breadth elective sequence.  Students who have a strong interest in research are encouraged to discuss research possibilities with the faculty.  Assignments are made based on mutual interest. Prereq: ECHE 350.
ECHE 355	Quantitative Molecular, Cellular and Tissue Bioengineering	3 Units	Physical and chemical principles associated with kinetics and mass transport. Molecular-cellular components incorporated in quantitative analysis of cellular, tissue, and organ systems. Mathematical and computational modeling developed for diagnostic and therapeutic applications. Offered as EBME 350 and ECHE 355.
ECHE 360	Transport Phenomena for Chemical Systems	4 Units	Fundamentals of fluid flow, heat and mass transport from the microscopic and macroscopic perspectives.  Applications to chemical systems, including steady and transient operations, convective and molecular (conduction and diffusion) effects, and interfacial transport.  Design of unit operations (e.g., heat exchangers). Heat and mass transfer analogies. Vector/tensor analysis and dimensional analysis used throughout. Prereq: Junior Standing and (ENGR 225 or (Prereq or coreq: EMAC 352)) and (MATH 223 or MATH 227).
ECHE 361	Separation Processes	4 Units	Analysis and design of separation processes involving distillation, extraction, absorption, adsorption, and membrane processes. Design problems and the physical and chemical processes involved in separation. Equilibrium stage, degrees of freedom in design, graphical and analytical design techniques, efficiency and capacity of separation processes. Prereq: ECHE 260. Prereq or Coreq: ECHE 363.
ECHE 362	Chemical Engineering Laboratory	4 Units	Experiments in the operation of separation and reaction equipment, including design of experiments, technical analysis, and economic analysis.  Experiments cover distillation, liquid-liquid extraction, heat transfer, fluidized beds, control, membrane separations, and chemical and electrochemical reactors. Prereq: ECHE 260, ECHE 360, ECHE 361, ECHE 363 and ECHE 364.
ECHE 362D	Chemical Engineering Laboratory in Denmark	4 Units	Chemical Engineering Laboratory in Denmark. A version of ECHE 362 taught during the summer at DTU in Lyngby. Prereq: ECHE 260 and ECHE 360 and ECHE 361 and ECHE 363 and ECHE 364.
ECHE 363	Thermodynamics of Chemical Systems	4 Units	First law, second law, phase equilibria, phase rule, chemical reaction equilibria, and applications to engineering problems. Thermodynamic properties of real substances, with emphasis on solutions. Thermodynamic analysis of processes including chemical reactions. Recommended preparation: ECHE 260. Prereq or Coreq: ENGR 225.
ECHE 364	Chemical Reaction Processes	4 Units	Design of homogeneous and heterogeneous chemical reactor systems. Relationships between type of reaction and choice of reactor. Methods of obtaining and analyzing kinetic data. Relationship between mechanism and reaction rate and brief introduction to catalysis. Recommended preparation: ECHE 360. Prereq: ECHE 260. Prereq or coreq: MATH 224 or MATH 228.
ECHE 365	Measurements Laboratory	3 Units	Laboratory introduction to the measurement process in engineering. Matching measurements to approximate and exact physical models is stressed. Extraction of physical parameters and estimation of the errors in the parameter estimates is an important part of the course. Example projects cover steady and unsteady state heat transfer, momentum transfer, and the first law of thermodynamics. Recommended preparation: ECHE 360. Prereq: ECHE 260 and ENGR 225. Prereq or Coreq: ECHE 363.
ECHE 367	Process Control	4 Units	Theoretical and practical aspects of feedback control of chemical processes.  The course involves extensive use of computer software with some exams taken using the computer.  Short laboratories and Labview training are integrated into the course.  Topics include: analysis of linear dynamical systems using Laplace transforms, derivation of unsteady state mathematical models of simple chemical processes, dynamic simulation of linear and nonlinear models, design of PID controllers by model inverse methods, tuning of controller to accommodate process model uncertainty, two degrees of freedom controllers, feed-forward and cascade control.  The Labview training covers programming basics, interfacing to a data acquisition system, and incorporating control algorithms.. Prereq or Coreq: (MATH 224 OR MATH 228) AND ECHE 260.
ECHE 372	Electrochemical Energy Storage	3 Units	Batteries and supercapacitors as part of renewable energy systems are introduced. Related fundamental electrochemistry concepts, materials and techniques are described. Challenges, current literature and future opportunities in energy storage will be discussed. Offered as ECHE 372 and ECHE 472. Prereq: Junior or Senior standing or Requisites Not Met permission.
ECHE 381	Electrochemical Engineering	3 Units	Engineering aspects of electrochemical processes including current and potential distribution, mass transport and fluid mechanical effects.  Examples from industrial processes including electroplating, industrial electrolysis, corrosion, and batteries. Recommended preparation: ECHE 260 or permission of instructor. Offered as ECHE 381 and ECHE 480.
ECHE 383	Chemical Engineering Applied to Microfabrication and Devices	3 Units	Silicon based microfabrication and micromachining require many chemical engineering technologies.  Microfabricated devices such as sensors are also directly related to chemical engineering.  The applications of chemical engineering principles to microfabrication and micromachining are introduced.  Oxidation processing, chemical vapor deposition, etching and patterning techniques, electroplating and other technologies are discussed.  Graduate students will submit an additional final project on some technical aspect of microfabrication technology or devices. Recommended preparation: ECHE 363. Offered as ECHE 383 and ECHE 483.
ECHE 384	Corrosion Fundamentals	3 Units	This course will cover fundamentals of corrosion, including thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of the electrochemical reactions leading to corrosion. Salient features of the various types of corrosion will be reviewed, with an emphasis on fundamental mechanisms. Electrochemical testing, corrosion monitoring and techniques to stifle corrosion will be discussed. After completion of this course, students will be able to classify corrosion systems, understand the mechanisms underlying corrosion, and outline strategies to design corrosion-resistant systems. Offered as ECHE 384 and ECHE 481.
ECHE 386	Protein Engineering	3 Units	This course will provide an in-depth examination of protein engineering topics and their applications. In particular, this class will cover the design and expression of recombinant proteins, purification strategies, and the incorporation of non-natural amino acids using a bacterial system. Specifically, amino acid sequences that dictate well-defined secondary structures such as beta-sheets, alpha-helices, and leucine zippers will be studied. Tissue engineering examples from the literature such as incorporation of bioactive sequences to promote specific cell response (e.g., cell adhesion sites and protease degradation sequences). In addition, this course will explore the application of protein engineering in drug delivery, electrochemical technology, sensors, and nanoparticle assembly. Current computational techniques for protein design and directed evolution methods will also be explored. Offered as ECHE 386 and ECHE 486.
ECHE 398	Process Analysis, Design and Safety	4 Units	Economic analysis and cost estimation of chemical processes. Equipment and materials selection in the chemical process industry. Scale consideration, plant layout and plant site selection. Process analysis, heuristics and optimization. Environmental and plant safety issues. Prereq: ENGR 225 and ECHE 260 and ECHE 361 and ECHE 363 and ECHE 364. Prereq or Coreq: ECHE 360.
ECHE 399	Chemical Engineering Design Project	3 Units	Students work in small groups on projects in conjunction with external companies.  The projects are defined by the company, and involve real issues current at the company.  All projects will involve design (i.e., open ended problems with no one solution or route), an economic analysis, and will account for possible safety and environmental issues.  The nature of the projects varies, depending on the needs of each company.  There are no lectures for this course, and students are expected to work on their project for an amount appropriate for a 3-credit course (10 hrs/week).  Recommended preparation: ECHE 362, ECHE 365, and ECHE 398. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: ECHE 360, ECHE 361, ECHE 364, and ECHE 367.
ECHE 400T	Graduate Teaching I	0 Unit	All Ph.D. students are required to take this course. The experience includes elements from the following tasks: development of teaching or lecture materials, teaching recitation groups, providing laboratory assistance, tutoring, exam/quiz/homework preparation and grading, mentoring students. Recommended preparation: Entering Ph.D. student in Chemical Engineering.
ECHE 401	Chemical Engineering Communications	1 Unit	Introductory course in communication for Chemical Engineering graduate students: preparation of first proposal for thesis, preparation of technical reports and scientific papers, literature sources, reviewing proposals, and manuscripts for professional journals, and making effective technical presentations.
ECHE 402	Chemical Engineering Communications II	2 Units	This course is a continuation of ECHE 401 and is designed to develop skills in writing proposals for funding research projects. The federal requirements are reviewed for submitting proposals to the major granting agents including NSF, NIH and DoD. We will study strategies for developing fundable projects. Each student will submit a research proposal for a thesis project and do an oral presentation of the project.
ECHE 431	Design of Chemical Engineering Systems: Material Analysis	3 Units	Applying fundamental mass-balance related analysis to industrial separations processes (distillation, absorption, membranes; both plate and packed columns), reactors (CSTR, PFR), and process control (PID feedback controllers).  Utilizing relevant thermodynamics theory including liquid-vapor and solid-liquid phase diagrams and azeotropes as needed for separations.  Fundamental theory will be integrated in comprehensive design applications including economic analysis (equipment costing, net-present value and return on investment). Process simulation software will be used to introduce students to advanced design tools.  Outcome goal will be to have the students learn to integrate fundamental knowledge from different chemical engineering topics to the comprehensive design of processes of industrial relevance. Prereq: Graduate student standing.
ECHE 432	Design of Chemical Engineering Systems: Energy Analysis	3 Units	Applying energy balance analysis to the design of comprehensive engineering processes. Fluid-flow fundamentals including mechanical energy balance and Bernoulli's equation, viscous flow in conduits and around submerged objects, Newton's law of viscosity and Navier-Stokes equation, among others, will be applied to the analysis and design of systems of industrial significance. Scaling analysis will elucidate critical process parameters. Thermodynamics first and second laws will be applied together with heat transfer models based on differential and integral analysis to the design of heat transfer systems including heat exchangers.  Fluid-flow and heat transport analysis will be combined with economic considerations to analyze comprehensive problems and optimize designs. Emphasis will be placed on green and sustainable energy processes. An outcome goal of the course is to have the students develop skills of integrating fundamental knowledge from the fields of fluid flow, heat transfer, and engineering economics to the analysis and design of comprehensive systems of practical interest. Prereq: Graduate student standing.
ECHE 461	Transport Phenomena	3 Units	Mechanisms of heat, mass, and momentum transport on both molecular and continuum basis. Generalized equations of transport. Techniques of solution for boundary value problems in systems of conduction, diffusion, and laminar flow. Boundary layer and turbulent systems. Recommended preparation: ECHE 360.
ECHE 462	Chemical Reaction Engineering	3 Units	Steady and unsteady state mathematical modeling of chemical reactors from conservation principles. Interrelation of reaction kinetics, mass and heat transfer, flow phenomena.  Catalytic and chemical vapor deposition reactors.  Determination of kinetic parameters.  Includes catalytic and chemical vapor deposition reactors. Recommended preparation: ECHE 364.
ECHE 464	Surfaces and Adsorption	3 Units	Thermodynamics of interfaces, nature of interactions across phase boundaries, capillary wetting properties of adsorbed films, friction and lubrication, flotation, detergency, the surface of solids, relation of bulk to surface properties of materials, non-catalytic surface reactions. Recommended preparation: CHEM 335 or equivalent.
ECHE 466	Colloid Science	3 Units	Stochastic processes and interparticle forces in colloidal dispersions. DLVO theory, stability criteria, and coagulation kinetics. Electrokinetic phenomena. Applications to electrophoresis, filtration, floatation, sedimentation, and suspension rheology. Investigation of suspensions, emulsions, gels, and association colloids. Recommended preparation: CHEM 335.
ECHE 469	Chemical Engineering Seminar	0 Unit	Distinguished outside speakers present current research in various topics of chemical engineering science. Graduate students also present technical papers based on thesis research.
ECHE 470	Graduate Research Colloquium	.5 Unit	Outside speakers present lectures on their current research. Various topics in the areas of chemical engineering science , basic and applied chemistry, bioengineering, material science, and applied mathematics are covered in the lectures. Graduate students also present technical papers based on their own research. Students are graded on the submission of one- page summary reports on any two lectures.
ECHE 472	Electrochemical Energy Storage	3 Units	Batteries and supercapacitors as part of renewable energy systems are introduced. Related fundamental electrochemistry concepts, materials and techniques are described. Challenges, current literature and future opportunities in energy storage will be discussed. Offered as ECHE 372 and ECHE 472. Prereq: Graduate standing or Requisites Not Met permission.
ECHE 474	Biotransport Processes	3 Units	Biomedical mass transport and chemical reaction processes.  Basic mechanisms and mathematical models based on thermodynamics, mass and momentum conservation.  Analytical and numerical methods to simulate in vivo processes as well as to develop diagnostic and therapeutic methods.  Applications include transport across membranes, transport in blood, tumor processes, bioreactors, cell differentiation, chemotaxis, drug delivery systems, tissue engineering processes.  Recommended preparation: EBME 350 or equivalent. Offered as EBME 474 and ECHE 474.
ECHE 475	Chemical Engineering Analysis	3 Units	Mathematical analysis of problems in transport processes, chemical kinetics, and control systems. Examines vector spaces and matrices and their relation to differential transforms, series techniques (Fourier, Bessel functions, Legendre polynomials). Recommended preparation: MATH 224.
ECHE 478	Membrane Separations	3 Units	Membrane-based separations provide a low-energy technique for performing chemical engineering separations and have applications in water treatment, energy, and human health.  This course will provide an introduction to membrane transport mechanisms including solution diffusion, pore-flow and active transport. The course will also cover membrane fabrication methods, analytical techniques for membrane characterization and performance metrics. Fundamental concepts will be discussed in the context of particle filtration, nanofiltration, reverse osmosis, gas separations processes and emerging applications like membrane chromatography. Prereq: Graduate Standing or Requisites Not Met permission.
ECHE 479	Radiochemistry	3 Units	This course is intended to provide students with a basic understanding of fundamental chemical and physical properties of radioactive elements. The course will begin with a review of radioactive decay modes and nuclear chemistry. The majority of the course will focus on the solution chemistry, bonding, kinetics and thermodynamics of actinides in the context of analytical purification processes such as liquid-liquid extraction and resin-based chromatography. Common radioanalytical techniques such as gamma spectroscopy, alpha spectroscopy and liquid scintillation counting will also be discussed. Prereq: Graduate student standing.
ECHE 480	Electrochemical Engineering	3 Units	Engineering aspects of electrochemical processes including current and potential distribution, mass transport and fluid mechanical effects.  Examples from industrial processes including electroplating, industrial electrolysis, corrosion, and batteries. Recommended preparation: ECHE 260 or permission of instructor. Offered as ECHE 381 and ECHE 480.
ECHE 481	Corrosion Fundamentals	3 Units	This course will cover fundamentals of corrosion, including thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of the electrochemical reactions leading to corrosion. Salient features of the various types of corrosion will be reviewed, with an emphasis on fundamental mechanisms. Electrochemical testing, corrosion monitoring and techniques to stifle corrosion will be discussed. After completion of this course, students will be able to classify corrosion systems, understand the mechanisms underlying corrosion, and outline strategies to design corrosion-resistant systems. Offered as ECHE 384 and ECHE 481.
ECHE 483	Chemical Engineering Applied to Microfabrication and Devices	3 Units	Silicon based microfabrication and micromachining require many chemical engineering technologies.  Microfabricated devices such as sensors are also directly related to chemical engineering.  The applications of chemical engineering principles to microfabrication and micromachining are introduced.  Oxidation processing, chemical vapor deposition, etching and patterning techniques, electroplating and other technologies are discussed.  Graduate students will submit an additional final project on some technical aspect of microfabrication technology or devices. Recommended preparation: ECHE 363. Offered as ECHE 383 and ECHE 483.
ECHE 486	Protein Engineering	3 Units	This course will provide an in-depth examination of protein engineering topics and their applications. In particular, this class will cover the design and expression of recombinant proteins, purification strategies, and the incorporation of non-natural amino acids using a bacterial system. Specifically, amino acid sequences that dictate well-defined secondary structures such as beta-sheets, alpha-helices, and leucine zippers will be studied. Tissue engineering examples from the literature such as incorporation of bioactive sequences to promote specific cell response (e.g., cell adhesion sites and protease degradation sequences). In addition, this course will explore the application of protein engineering in drug delivery, electrochemical technology, sensors, and nanoparticle assembly. Current computational techniques for protein design and directed evolution methods will also be explored. Offered as ECHE 386 and ECHE 486. Prereq: Graduate standing or requisites not met permission.
ECHE 500T	Graduate Teaching II	0 Unit	All Ph.D. students are required to take this course. The experience will include elements from the following tasks:  development of teaching or lecture materials, teaching recitation groups, providing laboratory assistance, tutoring, exam/quiz/homework preparation and grading, mentoring students. Recommended preparation: Ph.D. student in Chemical Engineering.
ECHE 508	Seminar on Review of Literature on Research Topic	3 Units	Impactful research requires a deep and comprehensive understanding of the current state of research on the topic.  A critical review of relevant background literature will help determine what is already known on the topic, how extensively the topic has already been studied, who are the experts active in the field, and the relevant key questions that deserve further exploration.  A review of the literature that describes methodologies (both experimental and theoretical) used in prior studies or new approaches that could be adapted from other research areas can also lead to the effective pursuit of the research topic. Through this course, students will learn how to develop a plan for a literature review, conduct the literature review and monitor continuing developments in the field, and create an annotated bibliography appropriate to the research project.
ECHE 509	Seminar on Preparation of Articles for Publication in Journals	3 Units	This course is intended for advanced graduate students who have generated results at the stage of being ready to be written up for a journal article.  The course will cover: understanding what findings warrant publication, factors affecting journal selection, formatting requirements of journals, publication-quality figures, appropriate material for each of the sections of the paper.  During the course students will be putting together a manuscript based on their research that would eventually be submitted to a journal.
ECHE 580	Special Topics	3 Units	Special topics in chemical engineering. Prereq: Consent of instructor.
ECHE 600T	Graduate Teaching III	0 Unit	All Ph.D. students are required to take this course. The experience will include elements from the following tasks: development of teaching or lecture materials, teaching recitation groups, providing laboratory assistance, tutoring, exam/quiz/homework preparation and grading, mentoring students. Recommended preparation: Ph.D. student in Chemical Engineering.
ECHE 601	Independent Study	1 - 18 Units	
ECHE 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
ECHE 660	Special Problems	1 - 18 Units	Research course taken by Plan B M.S. students.
ECHE 695	Project M.S.	1 - 9 Units	Research course taken by Plan B M.S. students. Prereq: Enrolled in ECHE Plan B Program.
ECHE 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
CHEM 105	Principles of Chemistry I	3 Units	Atomic structure; thermochemistry; periodicity, bonding and molecular structure; intermolecular forces; properties of solids; liquids, gases and solutions. Recommended preparation: One year of high school chemistry.
CHEM 106	Principles of Chemistry II	3 Units	Thermodynamics, chemical equilibrium; acid/base chemistry; oxidation and reduction; kinetics; spectroscopy; introduction to nuclear, organic, inorganic, and polymer chemistry. Prereq: CHEM 105 or CHEM 111.
CHEM 111	Principles of Chemistry for Engineers	4 Units	A first course in university chemistry emphasizing chemistry of materials for engineering students.  Atomic theory and quantitative relationships; gas laws and kinetic theory; solutions, acid-base properties and pH; thermodynamics and equilibrium; kinetics, catalysis, and mechanisms; molecular structure and bonding. Recommended preparation: One year of high school chemistry.
CHEM 113	Principles of Chemistry Laboratory	2 Units	A one semester laboratory based on quantitative chemical measurements.  Experiments include analysis, synthesis and characterization, thermochemistry and chemical kinetics.  Computer analysis of data is a key part of all experiments. Prereq or Coreq: CHEM 105 or CHEM 106 or CHEM 111 or ENGR 145.
CHEM 119	Concepts for a Molecular View of Biology I	3 Units	The first semester of a two-course sequence in elementary inorganic, organic, and biochemistry, intended for nursing students or non-majors.  Topics include: atomic theory, the periodic table, chemical bonds, molecular geometry, ideal gas laws, equilibrium and reaction rates, acids and bases, nuclear chemistry, and nomenclature and reactions of organic compounds (including alkyl, aryl, alcohol, carbonyl, and amino compounds).  Problems involving numeric computation are emphasized.  This course is not open to students with credit for CHEM 105 or CHEM 111.
CHEM 121	Concepts for a Molecular View of Biology II	3 Units	The second course of a two-semester sequence in elementary inorganic, organic, and biochemistry, intended for nursing students or non-majors.  Topics include: carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, enzyme kinetics, metabolic pathways and bioenergetics, DNA and RNA, methods of molecular biology, and nutrition.  Applications to human physiology and medicine emphasized.  This course is not open to students with credit for CHEM 223 or CHEM 323. Prereq: CHEM 119.
CHEM 223	Introductory Organic Chemistry I	3 Units	Introductory course for science majors and engineering students. Develops themes of structure and bonding along with elementary reaction mechanisms. Includes treatment of hydrocarbons, alkyl halides, alcohols, and ethers as well as an introduction to spectroscopy. Prereq: CHEM 106 or ENGR 145.
CHEM 224	Introductory Organic Chemistry II	3 Units	Continues and extends themes of structure and bonding from CHEM 223 and continues spectroscopy and more complex reaction mechanisms. Includes treatment of aromatic rings, carbonyl compounds, amines, and selected special topics. Prereq: CHEM 223 or CHEM 323.
CHEM 233	Introductory Organic Chemistry Laboratory I	2 Units	An introductory organic laboratory course emphasizing microscale operations.  Synthesis and purification of organic compounds, isolation of natural products, and systematic identification of organic compounds by physical and chemical methods. Prereq: (CHEM 106 or ENGR 145) and CHEM 113. Prereq or Coreq: CHEM 223 or CHEM 323.
CHEM 234	Introductory Organic Chemistry Laboratory II	2 Units	A continuation of CHEM 233, involving multi-step organic synthesis, peptide synthesis, product purification and analysis using sophisticated analytical techniques such as chromatography and magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Prereq: CHEM 233. Prereq or Coreq: CHEM 224
CHEM 290	Chemical Laboratory Methods for Engineers	3 Units	Techniques of chemical synthesis, analysis, and characterization.  Uses students' backgrounds in general and organic chemistry, but requires no background in chemical laboratory operations. Prereq or Coreq: CHEM 223 or CHEM 323.
CHEM 301	Introductory Physical Chemistry I	3 Units	First of a two-semester sequence covering principles and applications of physical chemistry, intended for chemistry and engineering majors and other students having primary interests in biochemical, biological or life-science areas. States and properties of matter. Thermodynamics and its application to chemical and biochemical systems. Chemical equilibrium. Electrochemistry. Recommended preparation: One year each of undergraduate physics and calculus, preferably including partial derivatives. Prereq: CHEM 106 or ENGR 145.
CHEM 302	Introductory Physical Chemistry II	3 Units	Continuation of CHEM 301. Chemical kinetics and catalysis. Introductory quantum chemistry. Spectroscopy. Statistical thermodynamics. Prereq: CHEM 301 or CHEM 335.
CHEM 304	Quantitative Analysis Laboratory	2 Units	A one-semester laboratory course providing practical experience in the analytical process.  Focus is on statistical error analysis of measurements, method validation and instrument calibration, and reporting.  Basic laboratory skills are developed and evaluated based on accuracy and precision of measurements.  Experiments using titration, spectroscopy, electrochemistry, liquid and gas chromatography, and mass spectrometry are conducted. Prereq: (CHEM 106 or ENGR 145) and CHEM 113.  Coreq: CHEM 310.
CHEM 305	Introductory Physical Chemistry Laboratory	3 Units	A one-semester laboratory course focusing on the principles and quantitative characterization of chemical and biochemical systems.  Experiments include chemical equilibrium kinetics, electrochemistry, spectroscopy and the use of computers for the statistical analysis of experimental data.  Seminar discussions and disciplinary writing of results. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: CHEM 301 and CHEM 304 or CHEM 335.  Or Prereq or Coreq:  CHEM 302 or CHEM 336.
CHEM 306	Biochemistry Laboratory	3 Units	A one semester laboratory and lecture course developed to introduce students to a variety of chemical biology laboratory themes including buffering, identification of amino acids, immunoassay, ligand binding, cellular fractionation, enzyme isolation and purification, proteomics, and enzyme kinetics. Techniques include titration, various forms of chromatography, colorimetric assays, electrophoresis, high performance liquid chromatography and liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry. Recommended preparation: CHEM 328/CHEM 428. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: CHEM 233.
CHEM 310	Foundations of Analytical Chemistry	3 Units	A one-semester lecture covering classical and modern aspects of the analytical process; analysis requirements, method selection including capabilities and limitations, sampling and sample processing, measurement data statistics for evaluation of precision and accuracy, method validation, and reporting.  Fundamental concepts in equilibrium thermodynamics are covered in the context of chemical analysis.  Methods based on titration, spectroscopy, electrochemistry, chromatography, and mass spectrometry are emphasized. Prereq: CHEM 106 and CHEM 113.  Coreq: CHEM 304.
CHEM 311	Inorganic Chemistry I	3 Units	Fundamentals of inorganic chemistry. Topics include molecular structure, molecular shape and symmetry, structure of solids, d-metal complexes, oxidation and reduction, and acids and bases. Prereq or Coreq: CHEM 224 or CHEM 324.
CHEM 314	Innovation and French Science	Past, Present, and Future	3 Units	The French scientific enterprise over the past 250 years has been buffeted by politics, war, civil unrest, and economic and societal changes.  This study abroad course examines the evolution of science in France in light of these influences, how women have play an outsized role relative to the U.S., and the centrality of the French to humanity's scientific endeavor over the centuries. Students will visit many important scientific venues, both historical and modern, around Paris and elsewhere in the country.  Readings from a variety of sources -- scientific, literary, historical -- and informal meetings with French scientists, engineers, and students will provide a comprehensive portrait of French science and scientific history from a variety of perspectives.  The course will be conducted in English, although there is ample opportunity to interact in French if the student desires.  The course meets the CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement and may meet breadth requirements in certain programs.  Not available for credit to students who have completed FRCH 328/428, PHYS 333, WGST 333, or WLIT 353/453. Offered as CHEM 314, HSTY 314, PHYS 314, and WGST 314. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CHEM 322	Laboratory Methods in Organic Chemistry	3 Units	Experimental approach to the synthesis, purification and characterization of organic compounds.  Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and infrared (IR) spectroscopies; chromatographic techniques. Prereq: CHEM 304 and CHEM 223 or CHEM 323.   Prereq or Coreq: CHEM 224 or CHEM 324.
CHEM 323	Organic Chemistry I	3 Units	Relationships between molecular structure and chemical reactivity and development of sophisticated problem-solving skills in the context of organic reaction mechanisms and multi-step synthesis. Homolytic and heterolytic substitution, elimination, oxidation and reduction reactions; topics in stereochemistry and spectroscopy. Recommended for chemistry, biochemistry, and related majors. Prereq: CHEM 106 or ENGR 145.
CHEM 324	Organic Chemistry II	3 Units	Continuation of CHEM 323. Introduces the chemistry of carbonyl, aromatic and amino functional groups, and develops the concepts of conjugation and resonance, molecular orbital theory and pericyclic reactions. Prereq: CHEM 223 or CHEM 323.
CHEM 325	Physical Methods for Determining Organic Structure	3 Units	Structure determination of organic compounds using mass spectrometry and modern instrumental techniques such as infrared, ultraviolet, visible, and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Recommended preparation: Two semesters of undergraduate organic chemistry. Offered as CHEM 325 and CHEM 425.
CHEM 328	Introductory Biochemistry I	3 Units	A survey of biochemistry with a strong emphasis on the chemical logic underlying the structure, function, and evolution of biomolecules. Amino acids and protein structure, purification, and analysis. DNA, RNA, genes, and genomes. DNA replication, repair, and recombination. RNA synthesis and processing. Protein synthesis and turnover, control of gene expression. Hemoglobin. Drug development. Enzyme kinetics, catalytic and regulatory strategies. Carbohydrates.  Offered as CHEM 328 and CHEM 428. Prereq: CHEM 224 or CHEM 323.
CHEM 329	Biochemistry II: Living Systems	3 Units	A survey of biochemical systems exploring their molecular circuitry and architecture. Lipids, cell membranes, channels and pumps. Signal transduction and receptors. Glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, citric acid cycle, and glycogen metabolism. Redox processes, electron transport, and photosynthesis. Fatty acid and amino acid biosynthesis and degradation. Nucleotide, lipid, and steroid biosynthesis. Sensory and immune systems. Molecular motors.  Offered as CHEM 329 and CHEM 429. Prereq: CHEM 328.
CHEM 331	Laboratory Methods in Inorganic Chemistry	3 Units	Synthesis, separation techniques, physical properties, and analysis. Advanced techniques of chemical synthesis, leading the student to the preparation of interesting inorganic and organometallic compounds. Offered as: CHEM 331 and CHEM 431. Prereq: CHEM 322.
CHEM 332	Laboratory Methods in Physical Chemistry	3 Units	Modern techniques of physicochemical measurement, including, kinetics, spectroscopy, and electrochemistry and the use of statistical methods for the analysis of experimental data. Seminar discussions and disciplinary writing of results. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: CHEM 304. Prereq or Coreq: CHEM 336.
CHEM 333	Medicinal Chemistry and Drug Development	3 Units	This course provides an overview on how principles in chemistry and biology are integrated to facilitate drug development.  Primary emphasis will be placed on the development of organic molecules as drugs and metabolic enzymes as drug targets.  Subjects pertinent to the introduction of medicinal chemistry, evaluation of drug efficacies in vitro and in vivo, and drug metabolism will be covered. Offered as CHEM 333 and CHEM 433. Prereq: CHEM 223 or CHEM 323 and BIOL 215. Coreq: CHEM 224 or CHEM 324.
CHEM 335	Physical Chemistry I	3 Units	First of a two-semester sequence of physical chemistry for chemistry majors and others with career goals in the physical sciences or engineering. Thermodynamics and its application to chemical systems: First Law, Heat, Work, internal energy, State functions, Thermochemistry, Entropy, 2nd and 3rd law of thermodynamics, Chemical equilibrium, Real Gases, Phase diagrams, ideal and real solutions, Electrolyte solutions, and Electrochemical cells, batteries and fuel cells. Introduction to chemical kinetics. This class is taught using the flipped classroom strategy, where students are expected to learn the basic concepts before class by reading relevant notes and textbook sections, as well as watching videos and answering pre-class questions.  In class, students work on exercises and solving problems.  Students have ample opportunities to clarify concepts, ask questions, and learn from both peers (in group settings) and the teacher.  Recommended preparation: One year each of undergraduate physics and calculus, including partial derivatives. Prereq: CHEM 106 or ENGR 145.
CHEM 336	Physical Chemistry II	3 Units	Continuation of CHEM 335. Reaction kinetics and catalysis. Reaction dynamics. Chemical quantum mechanics. Statistical mechanics and thermodynamics. Spectroscopy. Prereq: CHEM 335 or Chemical Engineering Major with at least Junior standing.
CHEM 337	Quantum Mechanics I	3 Units	Introduction to quantization, measurement and the Schrodinger equation; angular momentum and states of molecules. Perturbation theory, spectroscopy and chemical bonding. Variational theory and calculations of molecular properties. Offered as CHEM 337 and CHEM 446. Prereq: CHEM 336.
CHEM 340	Solar Energy Conversion	3 Units	This is a multidisciplinary course from a chemist's point of view.  This course teaches the background necessary to read and understand the scientific literature on solar energy conversion, and includes some basic device physics, materials chemistry and chemistry.  Topics provide an overview of the field and includes: Global energy perspective, principles of photovoltaics, crystalline solar cells, thin-film solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells, organic solar cells (with emphasis on polymer-based solar cells), photoelectrochemical cells and artificial photosynthesis for fuel production, and semiconductor nanostructures and quantum dots for solar energy conversion.   The course includes three laboratories and a demo using state-of-the-art equipment, as well as presentations of recent research articles by the graduate students.  It is recommended that students have experience with thermodynamics.  The following CWRU courses would meet this expectation: CHEM 301, CHEM 335, ENGR 225 or PHYS 313. Offered as CHEM 340 and CHEM 440. Prereq: CHEM 106 or ENGR 145.
CHEM 341	Functional Nanomaterials	3 Units	This course is designed to introduce important concepts on the fundamental physical and chemical properties of technologically important nanometer scale materials. The course will cover an overview of the scientific principles pertaining to new properties at the nanoscale; synthesis and characterization tools; and existing and emerging applications of nanomaterials. It will center on current research developments on major classes of functional nanomaterials, including plasmonic nanoparticles, quantum dots, nanomagnets, carbon nanotubes, nanocatalysts and hybrid inorganic/organic nanostructures. In addition an emphasis will be placed on understanding the broader societal, economical and environmental impact of the scientific and technological advances brought forward by nanotechnology. Offered as CHEM 341 and CHEM 441.
CHEM 342	Computational Chemistry	3 Units	An introduction to computational methods in electronic structure. Molecular mechanics, semiempirical molecular orbital calculations, ab initio, post Hartree-Fock, density-functional theories, and hybrid approaches will be addressed. Continuum solvation calculations will be considered, time permitting. Offered as CHEM 342 and CHEM 442. Prereq: CHEM 223 or CHEM 323.
CHEM 348	Chemistry Fermentation Brewing: To Discern the Molecular Basis of Fermentation and Beer Brewing	3 Units	This course includes in-depth discussions of the chemistry and procedures underlying either an aspect of the brewing process or a style of beer in order to discern the molecular basis of fermentation and beer brewing.  The biochemistry of yeast fermentation and hops, as well as mashing, lautering, boiling, conditioning, filtering, and packaging will be discussed.  There is no lab component (such as brewing beer), although field trips to pubs including the Jolly-Scholar pub (located on campus) will be part of the course, as well as invited speakers who have set up local microbreweries.  Each student will be expected to have basic background knowledge of chemistry, such as material taught in standard first year General Chemistry courses. Offered as CHEM 348 and CHEM 448. Prereq: CHEM 106 or ENGR 145.
CHEM 350	Modern Molecular Spectroscopy: Study of the Interactions Between Light and Matter	3 Units	This course is aimed to provide a modern treatment of molecular spectroscopy for physical chemists and for other related areas of interest. At the same time, it will attempt to serve the more generally interested science and engineering student to learn about the many interactions that light undergoes with matter. Offered as CHEM 350 and CHEM 450. Prereq: CHEM 302 or CHEM 310 or CHEM 336.
CHEM 395	Chemistry Colloquium Series	1 Unit	Course content provided by Thursday chemistry department colloquia (or Frontiers in Chemistry lectures). Discussion sessions review previous lectures and lay foundation for forthcoming lectures.
CHEM 397	Undergraduate Research	1 - 6 Units	Independent research project within a research group in the chemistry department or, by petition, within a research group in another Case department. Arrangements should be made with the faculty member selected. Open to all chemistry majors and other qualified students; required for Honors in Chemistry. A written report is required each semester.
CHEM 398	Undergraduate Research/Senior Capstone Project	3 - 6 Units	Independent research project within a research group in the chemistry department or, by petition, within a research group in another Case department. Arrangements should be made by consultation with the faculty member selected and the Senior Capstone Committee of the chemistry department. Open to all chemistry majors and other qualified students. Satisfies the research requirement for Honors in Chemistry. A written report and public oral presentations are required. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
CHEM 406	Chemical Kinetics	3 Units	Theory and characterization of chemical rate processes. Recommended preparation: Two semesters of undergraduate physical chemistry.
CHEM 412	Advanced Inorganic Chemistry I	3 Units	Chemistry of inorganic systems. Spectroscopy, magnetism, and stereochemistry of transition metal compounds. Recommended preparation: One semester of undergraduate inorganic chemistry and two semesters of undergraduate physical chemistry.
CHEM 414	Organometallic Reactions and Structures	3 Units	Bonding, structure, and mechanistic aspects of organometallic chemistry and the relevance of organometallic species to chemical catalysis. Recommended preparation: One semester of undergraduate inorganic chemistry.
CHEM 421	Advanced Organic Chemistry I	3 Units	Structure, bonding, and molecular orbital theory.  Stereochemistry and conformational analysis.  Reaction mechanisms.  Aromaticity and aromatic substitution.  Pericyclic reactions, orbital symmetry conservation, and free radical chemistry. Recommended preparation: Two semesters of undergraduate organic chemistry.
CHEM 425	Physical Methods for Determining Organic Structure	3 Units	Structure determination of organic compounds using mass spectrometry and modern instrumental techniques such as infrared, ultraviolet, visible, and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Recommended preparation: Two semesters of undergraduate organic chemistry. Offered as CHEM 325 and CHEM 425.
CHEM 428	Introductory Biochemistry I	3 Units	A survey of biochemistry with a strong emphasis on the chemical logic underlying the structure, function, and evolution of biomolecules. Amino acids and protein structure, purification, and analysis. DNA, RNA, genes, and genomes. DNA replication, repair, and recombination. RNA synthesis and processing. Protein synthesis and turnover, control of gene expression. Hemoglobin. Drug development. Enzyme kinetics, catalytic and regulatory strategies. Carbohydrates.  Offered as CHEM 328 and CHEM 428.
CHEM 429	Biochemistry II: Living Systems	3 Units	A survey of biochemical systems exploring their molecular circuitry and architecture. Lipids, cell membranes, channels and pumps. Signal transduction and receptors. Glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, citric acid cycle, and glycogen metabolism. Redox processes, electron transport, and photosynthesis. Fatty acid and amino acid biosynthesis and degradation. Nucleotide, lipid, and steroid biosynthesis. Sensory and immune systems. Molecular motors.  Offered as CHEM 329 and CHEM 429.
CHEM 431	Laboratory Methods in Inorganic Chemistry	3 Units	Synthesis, separation techniques, physical properties, and analysis. Advanced techniques of chemical synthesis, leading the student to the preparation of interesting inorganic and organometallic compounds. Offered as: CHEM 331 and CHEM 431. Prereq: CHEM 322
CHEM 433	Medicinal Chemistry and Drug Development	3 Units	This course provides an overview on how principles in chemistry and biology are integrated to facilitate drug development.  Primary emphasis will be placed on the development of organic molecules as drugs and metabolic enzymes as drug targets.  Subjects pertinent to the introduction of medicinal chemistry, evaluation of drug efficacies in vitro and in vivo, and drug metabolism will be covered. Offered as CHEM 333 and CHEM 433.
CHEM 435	Synthetic Methods in Organic Chemistry	3 Units	Systematic consideration of reactions involving functional group transformations and carbon-carbon bond formations used in modern organic synthesis. Recommended preparation: Two semesters of undergraduate organic chemistry.
CHEM 438	Bioorganic and Environmental Photochemistry	3 Units	This discusses the fundamental principles of molecular and supramolecular photochemistry. In particular, the fundamental paradigms of light absorption by molecules and the photochemical and photophysical mechanisms by which molecules dispose of the excess energy after light absorption will be described. The goal is to develop paradigms for understanding experimental and theoretical aspects of molecular photophysics relevant to bioorganic, supramolecular, and environmental photochemistry, as well as to other light-induced processes such as photosynthesis, photocatalysis, and photovoltaics. The paradigms for determining photochemical mechanisms, the theory of the fundamental photochemical primary processes, and examples of important photochemical primary processes will be reviewed. Selected experimental techniques and theoretical methods used to probe the dynamics of electronic excited states in molecules and their photoreactivity will be presented. Advanced photochemical applications for understanding the electronic relaxation pathways and photochemistry of selected families of bioorganic molecules and environmental pollutants in natural waters will be discussed.  Recommended Preparation: Chemical Kinetics (CHEM 406 or equivalent) and Elementary Differential Equations (MATH 224 or equivalent). Prereq: CHEM 336 and MATH 124.
CHEM 440	Solar Energy Conversion	3 Units	This is a multidisciplinary course from a chemist's point of view.  This course teaches the background necessary to read and understand the scientific literature on solar energy conversion, and includes some basic device physics, materials chemistry and chemistry.  Topics provide an overview of the field and includes: Global energy perspective, principles of photovoltaics, crystalline solar cells, thin-film solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells, organic solar cells (with emphasis on polymer-based solar cells), photoelectrochemical cells and artificial photosynthesis for fuel production, and semiconductor nanostructures and quantum dots for solar energy conversion.   The course includes three laboratories and a demo using state-of-the-art equipment, as well as presentations of recent research articles by the graduate students.  It is recommended that students have experience with thermodynamics.  The following CWRU courses would meet this expectation: CHEM 301, CHEM 335, ENGR 225 or PHYS 313. Offered as CHEM 340 and CHEM 440.
CHEM 441	Functional Nanomaterials	3 Units	This course is designed to introduce important concepts on the fundamental physical and chemical properties of technologically important nanometer scale materials. The course will cover an overview of the scientific principles pertaining to new properties at the nanoscale; synthesis and characterization tools; and existing and emerging applications of nanomaterials. It will center on current research developments on major classes of functional nanomaterials, including plasmonic nanoparticles, quantum dots, nanomagnets, carbon nanotubes, nanocatalysts and hybrid inorganic/organic nanostructures. In addition an emphasis will be placed on understanding the broader societal, economical and environmental impact of the scientific and technological advances brought forward by nanotechnology. Offered as CHEM 341 and CHEM 441.
CHEM 442	Computational Chemistry	3 Units	An introduction to computational methods in electronic structure. Molecular mechanics, semiempirical molecular orbital calculations, ab initio, post Hartree-Fock, density-functional theories, and hybrid approaches will be addressed. Continuum solvation calculations will be considered, time permitting. Offered as CHEM 342 and CHEM 442. Prereq: CHEM 223 or CHEM 323.
CHEM 445	Electrochemistry I	3 Units	Electrochemical properties and processes of electrode/electrolyte interfaces. Fundamental background for work in corrosion, electrodeposition, industrial electrolysis, electro-organic synthesis, batteries, fuel cells, and photoelectrochemical energy conversion.  Recommended preparation: One semester of undergraduate physical chemistry.
CHEM 446	Quantum Mechanics I	3 Units	Introduction of quantization, measurement and the Schrodinger equation; angular momentum and states of molecules. Perturbation theory, spectroscopy and chemical bonding. Variational theory and calculations of molecular properties. Recommended preparation: Two semesters of undergraduate physical chemistry. Offered as CHEM 337 and CHEM 446.
CHEM 448	Chemistry Fermentation Brewing: To Discern the Molecular Basis of Fermentation and Beer Brewing	3 Units	This course includes in-depth discussions of the chemistry and procedures underlying either an aspect of the brewing process or a style of beer in order to discern the molecular basis of fermentation and beer brewing.  The biochemistry of yeast fermentation and hops, as well as mashing, lautering, boiling, conditioning, filtering, and packaging will be discussed.  There is no lab component (such as brewing beer), although field trips to pubs including the Jolly-Scholar pub (located on campus) will be part of the course, as well as invited speakers who have set up local microbreweries.  Each student will be expected to have basic background knowledge of chemistry, such as material taught in standard first year General Chemistry courses. Offered as CHEM 348 and CHEM 448. Prereq: CHEM 106 or ENGR 145.
CHEM 450	Modern Molecular Spectroscopy: Study of the Interactions Between Light and Matter	3 Units	This course is aimed to provide a modern treatment of molecular spectroscopy for physical chemists and for other related areas of interest. At the same time, it will attempt to serve the more generally interested science and engineering student to learn about the many interactions that light undergoes with matter. Offered as CHEM 350 and CHEM 450. Prereq: CHEM 446.
CHEM 475	Protein Biophysics	3 Units	This course focuses on in-depth understanding of the molecular biophysics of proteins. Structural, thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of protein function and structure-function relationships will be considered at the advanced conceptual level. The application of these theoretical frameworks will be illustrated with examples from the literature and integration of biophysical knowledge with description at the cellular and systems level. The format consists of lectures, problem sets, and student presentations. A special emphasis will be placed on discussion of original publications.  Offered as BIOC 475, CHEM 475, PHOL 475, PHRM 475, and NEUR 475.
CHEM 506	Special Topics in Physical Chemistry	1 - 6 Units	(Credit as arranged.)  Lectures on advanced topics in physical chemistry presented by staff or visiting lecturers.  Course title, content, and credit change from year to year.
CHEM 507	Special Readings in Chemistry	1 - 6 Units	Detailed study of a special topic in chemistry under the guidance of a faculty member.
CHEM 508	Special Readings in Chemistry	1 - 6 Units	Detailed study of a special topic in chemistry under the guidance of a faculty member.
CHEM 601	Research	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)  Special research in an area of chemistry under the guidance of a faculty member.
CHEM 605	Chemistry Colloquium Series	0 Unit	Course content provided by Thursday chemistry department colloquia (or Frontiers in Chemistry lectures). Discussion sessions review previous lectures and lay foundation for forthcoming lectures.
CHEM 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
CHEM 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
CHST 301	Public Policy in Child Development	3 Units	This course introduces students to issues in public policy that impact children and families. Local, state, and federal child policy will be considered, and topics will include, for example, policies related to child poverty, education, child welfare, juvenile justice, and children's physical and mental health. Students will learn how policy is developed, how research informs policy and vice versa, and a framework for analyzing social policy. Recommended preparation: One social sciences course or consent. Offered as ANTH 305, ANTH 405, CHST 301, CHST 401, and POSC 382A.
CHST 302	Experiential Learning in Child Policy	3 Units	Focus on state and federal legislative policy impacting children, youth, and families.  Course includes an experiential learning component at the state or federal level and a travel experience to either Columbus, OH or Washington, DC to learn firsthand how policy is formed. Students may take this course twice for credit. Offered as ANTH 307 and CHST 302.
CHST 398	Child Policy Externship	3 Units	Externships offered through CHST 398/ANTH 308 give students an opportunity to work directly with professionals who design and implement policies that impact the lives of children and their families. Agencies involved are active in areas such as public health, including behavioral health, education. juvenile justice, childcare and/or child welfare.  Students apply for the externships, and selected students are placed in local public or nonprofit agencies with a policy focus.  Each student develops an individualized learning plan in consultation with the Childhood Studies Program faculty and the supervisor in the agency. CHST 398/ANTH 308 is a 3 credit-hour course and may be taken twice for a total of 6 credit hours. Offered as CHST 398 and ANTH 308. Prereq: CHST 301.
CHST 398C	Child Policy Externship and Capstone	3 Units	Externships offered through CHST/ANTH/PSCL 398C give students an opportunity to work directly with professionals who design and implement policies that impact the lives of children and their families. Agencies involved are active in areas such as public health, including behavioral health, education, juvenile justice, childcare and/or child welfare.  Students apply for the externships, and selected students are placed in local public or nonprofit agencies with a policy focus. Each student develops an individualized learning plan in consultation with the Childhood Studies Program faculty and the supervisor in the agency.  Offered as CHST 398C, ANTH 398C, and PSCL 398C. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: CHST 301.
CHST 399	Independent Study	1 - 6 Units	Students propose topics for independent reading and research.
CHST 401	Public Policy in Child Development	3 Units	This course introduces students to issues in public policy that impact children and families. Local, state, and federal child policy will be considered, and topics will include, for example, policies related to child poverty, education, child welfare, juvenile justice, and children's physical and mental health. Students will learn how policy is developed, how research informs policy and vice versa, and a framework for analyzing social policy. Recommended preparation: One social sciences course or consent. Offered as ANTH 305, ANTH 405, CHST 301, CHST 401, and POSC 382A.
AMST 117	Exploring American History Through Biography	3 Units	This discussion and lecture class uses various forms of biography to explore issues of American Identity throughout the course of American history.  The class will discuss how certain biographies have created archetypal American identities, and how issues such as race, class, gender, sexuality, religion, and historical context have shaped the writing, reading and purpose of biography. The last third of the class will consider the process of "national memory," the way the United States has decide to remember its past.  Here the "biography" is collective, and created by myriad strands of mass culture woven together to create a national mythology.  We will explore the works of those striving to pull apart these different strands, and explore what these memories tell us about established national identity. Students will explore biographical process through their assignments, and consider such questions as: How do American biographies influence our understanding of what it means to be American?  How does biographical medium affect the message?  Can we accept biography as history?  This course investigates biography as a constructed genre that comes in a variety of forms, including autobiography, biographical novels, oral histories, and film. Offered as AMST 117 and HSTY 117. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
AMST 270	American Art and Culture Before 1900	3 Units	Survey of the development of American art from colonial times to the present which explores how art has expressed both American values and American anxieties.  Painting is emphasized, but the course also considers architecture, the decorative arts, film, literature, and music. Offered as AMST 270 and ARTH 270.
AMST 271	American Art and Culture: The Twentieth Century	3 Units	Survey of the development of American art from 1900 to the present (and the future) which will explore how art has expressed both American values and American anxieties.  Painting will be emphasized, but the course will also consider architecture, the decorative arts, film, literature, and music. Offered as AMST 271 and ARTH 271.
CHIN 101	Elementary Chinese I	4 Units	Introductory course in speaking, understanding, reading and writing Chinese. Students are expected to achieve control of the sound system and basic sentence patterns of standard Mandarin Chinese. The course emphasizes speaking and aural comprehension.
CHIN 102	Elementary Chinese II	4 Units	Continuation of CHIN 101. Recommended preparation: Consent of department.
CHIN 201	Intermediate Chinese I	4 Units	Emphasizes basic structures of standard Mandarin Chinese; helps students improve reading, writing, listening and speaking abilities. Chinese culture, society, and people introduced through supplementary materials and activities. Recommended preparation: CHIN 102 or equivalent.
CHIN 202	Intermediate Chinese II	4 Units	Continuation of CHIN 201. Students must use course material offered by the Online Language Learning Center in addition to class meetings. Recommended preparation: CHIN 201.
CHIN 253	Introducing Chinese Religions	3 Units	This "topics" course offers an introduction to the academic study of Chinese religions. Whether approached through a particular theme or as a general historical introduction, each section of this course provides students with a general introduction to the academic study of religion and a basic religious literacy in the nuances and complexities in Chinese religions within various historical and socio-cultural contexts.  Section topics might include, but are not limited to:   Confucianism, Daoism, Chinese Buddhism, Gender and Sexuality in Chinese Religions.  Students may repeat the course for credit once (two times total for 6 credits), provided that the two sections are different. Offered as RLGN 153, ETHS 153 and CHIN 253. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CHIN 253C	Religion and Philosophy in China	3 Units	This course critically examines the three principal religious and philosophical traditions of China: the Confucian, Daoist, and Chinese Buddhist traditions. Through a combination of assigned print and online readings, video clips and documentaries, class discussions, and written assignments, students explore the origins and historical developments, principal thinkers, central religious and doctrinal themes, ethics, spirituality, popular devotions, social movements, and contemporary developments of these three major religious and philosophical traditions of China. Students will consider the wider social, cultural, ethical, economic, and political dimensions of Chinese religions and philosophies generally, and themes of community and society, identity constructions, personal experiences, movements, as well as their socio-cultural reproductions in contemporary China, and where appropriate, the Chinese Diaspora in North America. Offered as CHIN 253C, ETHS 253C, PHIL 253 and RLGN 253. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CHIN 301	Advanced Chinese I	4 Units	Students work to achieve fluency in listening, speaking, reading and writing. Students must attend Language Resource Center in addition to class meetings. Recommended preparation: CHIN 202 or equivalent. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CHIN 302	Advanced Chinese II	4 Units	Continuation of CHIN 301. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CHIN 316	Christianity in China	3 Units	This course critically evaluates Christianity's long history in China, beginning with the "Luminous Religion" (Jingjiao) that was propagated by Assyrian Christian missionaries in Tang China (7th century CE), the missionary endeavors of Catholic and Protestant foreign missionaries and mission societies, the rise of indigenous Chinese Christianities that sought independence from foreign missionaries, the impact of communist rule and the Cultural Revolution, and current developments involving both the official government-approved churches (i.e., the Three Self Patriotic Movement and the Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association) on the one hand, and the house church movement (jiating jiaohui) on the other hand. Students will critically discuss and analyze the historical dimensions of Christianity's presence in China and engagement with various social, cultural, political, philosophical, and religious aspects of Chinese society, past and present, and consider the implications of emergent forms of contemporary indigenous Chinese Christian movements for the future of Chinese Christianity. Offered as RLGN 316, RLGN 416, HSTY 322, CHIN 316 and ETHS 326. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CHIN 320	Chinese Popular Culture	3 Units	In this course we are going to study Chinese (including Mainland China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Chinese Diaspora) popular culture since the 1980s. By examining different forms of popular culture, including popular literature, film, music, TV programs, posters, the Internet, etc., we will be looking into their political, ideological, sociological, cultural, and psychological mechanisms. The film viewing will take place outside the class. Offered as: CHIN 320, ASIA 320 and WLIT 320. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CHIN 330	Chinese Cinema	3 Units	This course is an exploration to the history of and critical issues in Chinese cinema: we will discuss early film making in Shanghai, leftist melodrama, Socialist films, the Chinese New Wave, underground films, the film making in the era of globalization, and etc. Themes and genres that will be investigated include melodrama, the "Fifth Generation", underground film making, filmic representations of women, minority films, and historical epics. Films from mainland China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and diasporic communities will be discussed to illuminate what it means to be "Chinese."  All of the films in this course come with English subtitles; the film viewing will take place outside the class. Offered as CHIN 330 and ASIA 330. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CHIN 350	China and Green Cultural Transformation	3 Units	Taught in Chinese, this course aims at enhancing the students' proficiency in listening to, speaking, reading and writing Chinese at the intermediate and higher levels. As a content-driven course, it introduces students to the recent major green culture movements in China, focusing on the way the green cultural changes took place in relation to globalization, environment and climate protection, technology innovation, income redistribution, domestic consumption, and education, to meet the challenges of financial crisis, climate change, energy insecurity, and international competition. At the end of the semester, the students are expected to be able to understand readings and audiovisual materials, as well as communicate and present orally and in written formats green cultural issues covered in the course. Students who take CHIN350 are not allowed to earn credit for CHIN350D (Department Seminar), vice versa. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: CHIN 301.
CHIN 350D	China and Green Cultural Transformation	3 Units	Taught in Chinese, this course aims at enhancing the students' proficiency in listening to, speaking, reading and writing Chinese at the intermediate and higher levels. As a content-driven course, it introduces students to the recent major green culture movements in China, focusing on the way the green cultural changes took place in relation to globalization, environment and climate protection, technology innovation, income redistribution, domestic consumption, and education, to meet the challenges of financial crisis, climate change, energy insecurity, and international competition. At the end of the semester, the students are expected to be able to understand readings and audiovisual materials, as well as communicate and present orally and in written formats green cultural issues covered in the course. Students who take CHIN350 are not allowed to earn credit for CHIN350D (Department Seminar), vice versa. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: CHIN 340.
CHIN 380	Contemporary Chinese Texts I	3 Units	This course is designed for students who have completed CHIN 302 or equivalent. It provides intensive trainings in communicational skills by reading, watching, and discussing a variety of texts. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: CHIN 302 or equivalent.
CHIN 381	Contemporary Chinese Texts II	3 Units	This course is designed for students who have completed CHIN 380 or equivalent. It provides intensive training in communication skills by reading, watching, and discussing a variety of texts. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: CHIN 380.
CHIN 396	Senior Capstone - Chinese	3 Units	This course is a required capstone course for Chinese majors.  Students will complete a substantial research thesis in Chinese or English and make a public presentation in English with significant Chinese elements. Students take this course under the supervision of their faculty advisor. Permission required. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
CHIN 397	Senior Thesis I	3 Units	This course is the first of the two-semester thesis-writing sequence for majors in Chinese pursuing honors in the major. The two-semester sequence leads to a substantial research paper in Chinese or English with significant Chinese elements. Students take this course under the supervision of their faculty advisor. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Chinese major with Senior standing.
CHIN 398	Senior Thesis II	3 Units	This course is the second of the two-semester thesis-writing sequence required for Chinese majors pursuing honors in the major. The two semester sequence leads to a substantial research paper in Chinese or English with significant Chinese elements. Students take this course under the supervision of their faculty advisor. Prereq: CHIN 397.
CHIN 399	Independent Study	1 - 3 Units	Directed study for those students who have progressed beyond available course offerings and want to continue study of Chinese language, Chinese culture,  Chinese literature, or other Chinese Studies topics in Chinese. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: CHIN 302.
ECIV 160	Surveying and Computer Graphics	3 Units	Principles and practice of surveying; error analysis, topographic mapping, introduction to photogrammetry and GIS; principles of graphics; computer-aided-drafting. Laboratory.
ECIV 300	Undergraduate Research	3 Units	Research conducted under the supervision of a sponsoring Civil Engineering faculty member.  Research can be done on an independent topic or as part of an established on-going research activity.  The student will prepare a written report on the results of the research.  Course may fulfill one technical elective requirement.
ECIV 310	Strength of Materials	3 Units	Mechanical properties of materials, deformations, stresses, strains and their transformation.  Torsion of structural and machine elements, pressure vessels and beams under combined loading.  Deflection and statically indeterminate beams.  Energy methods and column stability. Prereq: ENGR 200.
ECIV 311	Civil Engineering Materials	3 Units	Steel, concrete, wood, masonry, and fiber-reinforced plastic.  Experiments, advanced reading, and field trips.  Strength, stiffness, ductility, and other properties of materials. Experiments on the flexural, compressive, and shear behavior of structural elements. Prereq: ECIV 310.
ECIV 315	Introduction to Structural Engineering and Analysis	3 Units	Introduction to the field of structural engineering and civil engineering structures.  Calculation of structural loads for design.  Static, linear, structural analysis of frame, truss, cable, and arch structures. Assessment of structural stability and determinacy.  Introduction to strength limit state theorems and use of structural analysis software. Prereq: ENGR 200.
ECIV 316	Matrix Analysis of Structures	3 Units	Matrix formulation and computer analysis (MATLAB recommended) for statically indeterminate linear structural systems; Stiffness method (direct/displacement method); Potential Energy Method; Development of element equations for 1D axial and flexural members and 2D triangle element; Transformation between local to global coordinates; Development of displacement fields (linear function for axial members and cubic function for flexural members); Shape function concept in approximation; Introduction to elasticity, finite element analysis and nonlinear structural analysis. Additional term project on programming for six degrees of freedom beam structure analysis will be assigned to students enrolled in ECIV 416. Recommended for all students: Linear Algebra, Structural Analysis, and MATLAB Programing. Offered as ECIV 316 and ECIV 416. Prereq: ECIV 315.
ECIV 330	Soil Mechanics	4 Units	The physical, chemical, and mechanical properties of soils. Soil classification, capillarity, permeability, and flow nets. One dimensional consolidation, stress and settlement analysis. Shear strength, stability of cuts, and design of embankments, retaining walls and footings. Standard laboratory tests performed for the determination of the physical and mechanical properties of soils. Laboratory. Recommended preparation: ECIV 310.
ECIV 340	Construction Management	3 Units	Selected topics in construction management including specifications writing, contract documents, estimating, materials and labor, bidding procedures and scheduling techniques. The course is augmented by guest lecturers from local industries.
ECIV 341	Construction Scheduling and Estimating	3 Units	The focus is on scheduling, and estimating and bidding for public and private projects. This includes highways as well as industrial and building construction. The use of computers with the latest software in estimating materials, labor, equipment, overhead and profit is emphasized. Recommended preparation: ECIV 340 and consent of instructor.
ECIV 342	BIM and Computer Graphics	3 Units	This course is intended to apply Building Information Modeling tools in a meaningful manner within the AEC field. The course will progress through the core concepts of widely used VDC tools: AutoCAD, Sketchup, Revit, Navisworks. The key areas of focus will be conceptualizing projects, quantity takeoff, scheduling, and constructability review. Class time will involve hands-on training and exercises that will simulate real-world situations and deadlines. Complexity levels in the models will be minimized to ensure focus on concepts. Students will have multiple opportunities to hone their presentation skills with their projects through the course progression. Prereq: ECIV 160 and ECIV 340.
ECIV 343	BIM Data Management & Remote Sensing	3 Units	The course is intended to create awareness and advocacy for advanced design and planning technologies in the AEC industry, and integration into standard BIM platforms.  The course will enhance competency in utilization of core BIM platforms for students with basic experience in Sketchup, Revit and Navisworks. Class time will involve hands-on exercises to simulate professional applications of technologies that improve accuracy and communication on projects. Technical equipment processes will be demonstrated in person, and situational challenges will be presented and assigned for course projects.  Technology focus will include drones, LIDAR, and virtual reality simulations.  Recommended Preparation: ECIV 341. Prereq: ECIV 342.
ECIV 351	Engineering Hydraulics and Hydrology	3 Units	Application of fluid statics and dynamics to Civil Engineering Design. Hydraulic machinery, pipe network analysis, thrust, hammer, open channel flow, sewer system design, culverts, flow gauging, retention/detention basin design. Applied hydrology, hydrograph analysis and hydraulic routing will also be introduced. Recommended preparation: Concurrent enrollment in ENGR 225.
ECIV 360	Civil Engineering Systems	3 Units	Introduction to probability and statistics. Discrete and continuous random variables, probability distributions, bivariate data, probabilistic analysis of systems, and reliability analysis.  Introduction to engineering economics.  Interest rates and equivalence, present worth, rate of return analysis, depreciation, and inflation.
ECIV 361	Water Resources Engineering	3 Units	Water doctrine, probabilistic analysis of hydrologic data, common and rare event analysis, flood forecasting and control, reservoir design, hydrologic routing, synthetic streamflow generation, hydroelectric power, water resource quality, water resources planning. Recommended preparation: ECIV 351.
ECIV 362	Solid and Hazardous Waste Management	3 Units	Origin and characterization of solid and hazardous waste.  Solid and hazardous waste regulations.  Methods of solid and hazardous waste disposal.  Waste management planning.  Landfill siting and design considerations. Site Conceptual Models for remediation of contaminated sites.  Technologies used for soil and groundwater remediation at solid and hazardous waste sites. Offered as ECIV 362 and ECIV 462.
ECIV 363	Environmental Engineering Green Stormwater Infrastructure	3 Units	This course will introduce students to the concepts of green infrastructure planning and design, impacts on the water cycle, water treatment mechanisms occurring within green infrastructure practices, regulatory drivers, and co-benefits and potential negative impacts on society or the environment. Students will examine case studies and develop concept plans for green infrastructure.  Recommended Preparation: Basic Chemistry. Offered as ECIV 363 and ECIV 463.
ECIV 368	Environmental Engineering	3 Units	Principle and practice of environmental engineering. Water and waste water engineering unit operations and processes including related topics from industrial waste disposal, air pollution and environmental health.
ECIV 372	Timber and Masonry Design	3 Units	Introduction to wood material. Design for timber beams and columns to resist vertical and lateral loads. Design of nailed and bolted connections. Introduction to masonry materials and design of wall. Offered as ECIV 372 and ECIV 472. Prereq: ECIV 310.
ECIV 373	Reinforced Concrete Design	3 Units	Use of ACI design methods for structural reinforced concrete members. Understanding of load combinations and load path in a typical concrete building structure. Analysis and design for flexure of singly reinforced & doubly reinforced sections, T-beams, one-way & two-way slabs, non-slender columns, and torsion members. Analysis and design for shear. Design for serviceability criteria and development of reinforcement. Prereq: ECIV 310 and ECIV 315.
ECIV 374	Structural Steel Design	3 Units	Use of the AISC specification for structural steel member design per the LRFD method. Understanding of gravity and lateral load paths in a typical steel building. Role of the Structural Engineer on a design team. Design of tension, compression and flexural members; design of combined bending/axial members; design of bolts and welds, connection elements, shear connections and moment resisting connections. Prereq: ECIV 310 and ECIV 315.
ECIV 396	Civil Engineering Special Topics I	1 - 3 Units	Special topics in civil engineering in which a regular course is not available. Conferences and report.
ECIV 397	Civil Engineering Topics II	3 Units	Special topics in civil engineering in which a regular course is not available. Conferences and report.
ECIV 398	Civil Engineering Senior Project	3 Units	Capstone course for civil engineering students. Material from previous and concurrent courses used to complete a multidisciplinary engineering design project. Professional engineering topics such as project management, engineering design, communications, and professional ethics. Requirements include periodic reporting of progress, plus a final oral presentation and written report. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
ECIV 400T	Graduate Teaching I	0 Unit	This series of three courses will provide Ph.D. students with practical experience in teaching at the University level and will expose them to effective teaching methods.  Each course assignment will be organized in coordination with the student's dissertation advisor and the department chairperson. Assignments will successively require more contact with students, with duties approaching the teaching requirements of a faculty member in the Ph.D. student's area of study. Prereq: Ph.D. students in Civil Engineering.
ECIV 411	Elasticity, Theory and Applications	3 Units	General analysis of deformation, strain, and stress. Elastic stress-strain relations and formulation of elasticity problems. Solution of elasticity problems by potentials. Simple beams. The torsion problem. Thick cylinders, disks, and spheres. Energy principle and introduction to variational methods. Elastic stability. Matrix and tensor notations gradually introduced, then used throughout the course. Recommended preparation: ECIV 310 or equivalent.
ECIV 415	Fracture Mechanics and Size Effect	3 Units	Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics: crack tip fields, stress intensity factors, energy release rate, J-integral, fracture criteria. Nonlinear Theories: R-curve, plastic fracture mechanics. Quasibrittle Materials: cohesive crack models, fracture process zone. Fatigue cracks. Size Effect: linear elastic fracture mechanics prediction, size effect in quasibrittle materials. Experimental determination of fracture properties. Recommended preparation: ECIV 411. Prereq: ECIV 310.
ECIV 416	Matrix Analysis of Structures	3 Units	Matrix formulation and computer analysis (MATLAB recommended) for statically indeterminate linear structural systems; Stiffness method (direct/displacement method); Potential Energy Method; Development of element equations for 1D axial and flexural members and 2D triangle element; Transformation between local to global coordinates; Development of displacement fields (linear function for axial members and cubic function for flexural members); Shape function concept in approximation; Introduction to elasticity, finite element analysis and nonlinear structural analysis. Additional term project on programming for six degrees of freedom beam structure analysis will be assigned to students enrolled in ECIV 416. Recommended for all students: Linear Algebra, Structural Analysis, and MATLAB Programing. Offered as ECIV 316 and ECIV 416. Prereq: Graduate Student standing.
ECIV 417	Structural Dynamics	3 Units	Modeling of structures as single and multi-degree of freedom dynamic systems and their response to various forms of dynamic excitation. The eigenvalue problem, damping, and design for dynamic response. Analytical response calculation including modal, response spectrum, and time history methods. Introduction to finite element modeling of structures for dynamic properties and response calculation. Prereq: EMAE 181 and (ECIV 321 or ECIV 428).
ECIV 420	Finite Element Analysis	3 Units	Theory and application of the finite element method. Approximation theory as the basis for finite element methods. The formulations for a variety of finite elements in one, two, and three dimensions. The modeling and analysis of structural components and systems using planar, solid, and plate elements. Implementations of element formulations using Matlab. An advanced finite element analysis program will be used for analysis of structural problems. Recommended preparation: ECIV 321 is a prerequisite for structural engineering students. Background in advanced mechanics and numerical analysis of structures is required for this course. If you have not completed these courses, please discuss with the instructor. Prereq: Graduate Standing or ECIV 321.
ECIV 421	Advanced Topics in Reinforced Concrete Structures	3 Units	Group project-based course to evaluate nonlinear dynamic behavior of multistory reinforced concrete structures designed to the US building design codes (ACI318, ASCE7, ASCE41); Main Topics including Review of RC Design Principles, Procedure Requirements and Assumptions; Inelastic Behavior of Plain Concrete, Reinforced Concrete, and Reinforcing Steel; Code-Based Design vs. Performance-Based Design; Strength vs. Displacement Demand Parameters at the Member, Story, and Structure Levels; Pushover Analysis Using an Open Source Code (OpenSees). Prereq: Graduate Standing or ECIV 321, ECIV 322 and ECIV 323.
ECIV 422	Advanced Structural Steel Design	3 Units	Advanced topics for the design of steel structures including member and frame stability, design of members for torsion, plate girders, base plate and anchorage connections, and basics of composite systems.  Plastic analysis and design concepts for structural engineering limit state load applications. Seismic design of steel lateral force resisting systems. Prereq: ECIV 374.
ECIV 425	Structural Design for Dynamic Loads	3 Units	Structural design problems in which dynamic excitations are of importance. Earthquake, wind, blast, traffic, and machinery excitations. Human sensitivity to vibration, mechanical behavior of structural elements under dynamic excitation, earthquake response and earthquake-resistant design, wind loading, damping in structures, hysteretic energy dissipation, and ductility requirements. Recommended preparation: ECIV 424.
ECIV 426	Probabilistic Analysis	3 Units	Introduction to probability and statistics. Uncertainty and decision analysis. Probability models for structural loads and strength.  Probabilistic analysis of engineering systems. Estimation of the reliability of structures and infrastructure systems.  Monte Carlo simulation. Recommended preparation: ECIV 360, introduction of probability and statistics, or equivalent.
ECIV 427	Environmental Organic Chemistry	3 Units	This is an advanced course focusing on examination of processes that effect the behavior and fate of anthropogenic organic contaminants in aquatic environments.  The lectures will focus on intermolecular interactions and thermodynamic principles governing the kinetics of some of the important chemical and physicochemical transformation reactions of organic contaminants.  Recommended Preparation: One semester of Organic chemistry or prior approval of the instructor.
ECIV 430	Foundation Engineering	3 Units	Subsoil exploration. Various types of foundations for structures, their design and settlement performance, including spread and combined footings, mats, piers, and piles. Design of sand-drain installations and earth-retaining structures including retaining walls, sheet piles, and cofferdams. Case studies. Recommended preparation: ECIV 330.
ECIV 432	Mechanical Behavior of Soils	3 Units	Soil statics and stresses in a half space-tridimensional consolidation and sand drain theory; stress-strain relations and representations with rheological models. Critical state and various failure theories and their experimental justification for cohesive and noncohesive soils. Laboratory measurement of rheological properties, pore water pressures, and strength under combined stresses. Laboratory. Recommended preparation: ECIV 330.
ECIV 433	Soil Dynamics	3 Units	I-DOF and M-DOF dynamics; wave propagation theory; dynamic soil properties. Foundation vibrations, design of machine foundations. Seismology; elastic and elastoplastic response spectra, philosophy of earthquake-resistant design.  One and two-dimensional soil amplification, liquefaction, dynamic settlement. Soil-structure interaction during earthquakes. Recommended preparation: ECIV 330 and consent of instructor.
ECIV 437	Pavement Analysis and Design	3 Units	Analysis and design of rigid and flexible airfield and highway pavements.  Pavement evaluation and rehabilitations, overlay design. Recommended preparation: ECIV 330.
ECIV 450	Environmental Engineering Chemistry	3 Units	Fundamentals of inorganic, organic, and physical chemistry with emphasis on the types of problems encountered in the environmental engineering field.  Equilibria among liquid, gaseous, and solid phases; kinetics to the extent that time permits.  A strong mathematical approach is taken in solving the equilibrium and kinetic problems presented.  Equilibrium speciation software for solution of more complex problems.  Topics that will be covered in the course include chemical equilibrium, acid/base reactions, mathematical problem solving approach, graphical approaches, titration curves, solubility of gases and solids, buffering systems, numerical solution of equilibrium problems, thermodynamics, oxidation-reduction reactions, principles of quantitative chemistry and analytical techniques, introduction to the use of analytical instrumentation, and chemical kinetics. Prereq: ECIV 368 or requisites not met permission.
ECIV 456	Intelligent Infrastructure Systems	3 Units	Topics on smart infrastructure systems; smart materials fabrication, embedded sensing technology for infrastructure condition monitoring, the system models for infrastructural condition diagnosing and adaptive controlling, and spatial-temporal integrated infrastructure management system.
ECIV 461	Environmental Engineering Biotechnology	3 Units	Process design fundamentals for biological reactors applied to environmental engineering processes, including wastewater treatment, bioremediation, and bioenergy production. Topics include mass balances, methane fermentation, fixed-growth reactors, molecular biology tools, and reactor models. Recommended preparation: ECIV 368 Environmental Engineering.
ECIV 462	Solid and Hazardous Waste Management	3 Units	Origin and characterization of solid and hazardous waste.  Solid and hazardous waste regulations.  Methods of solid and hazardous waste disposal.  Waste management planning.  Landfill siting and design considerations. Site Conceptual Models for remediation of contaminated sites.  Technologies used for soil and groundwater remediation at solid and hazardous waste sites. Offered as ECIV 362 and ECIV 462.
ECIV 463	Environmental Engineering Green Stormwater Infrastructure	3 Units	This course will introduce students to the concepts of green infrastructure planning and design, impacts on the water cycle, water treatment mechanisms occurring within green infrastructure practices, regulatory drivers, and co-benefits and potential negative impacts on society or the environment. Students will examine case studies and develop concept plans for green infrastructure.  Recommended Preparation: Basic Chemistry. Offered as ECIV 363 and ECIV 463.
ECIV 472	Timber and Masonry Design	3 Units	Introduction to wood material. Design for timber beams and columns to resist vertical and lateral loads. Design of nailed and bolted connections. Introduction to masonry materials and design of wall. Offered as ECIV 372 and ECIV 472.
ECIV 500T	Graduate Teaching II	0 Unit	This series of three courses will provide Ph.D. students with practical experience in teaching at the University level and will expose them to effective teaching methods.  Each course assignment will be organized in coordination with the student's dissertation advisor and the department chairperson. Assignments will successively require more contact with students, with duties approaching the teaching requirements of a faculty member in the Ph.D. student's area of study. Prereq: Ph.D. student in Civil Engineering.
ECIV 600T	Graduate Teaching III	0 Unit	This series of three courses will provide Ph.D. students with practical experience in teaching at the University level and will expose them to effective teaching methods.  Each course assignment will be organized in coordination with student's dissertation advisor and the department chairperson.  Assignments will successively require more contact with students, with duties approaching the teaching requirements of a faculty member in the Ph.D. student's area of study. Prereq: Ph.D. students in Civil Engineering.
ECIV 601	Independent Study	1 - 18 Units	Plan B.
ECIV 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	Plan A.
ECIV 660	Special Topics	1 - 18 Units	Topics of special interest to students and faculty. Topics can be those covered in a regular course when the student cannot wait for the course to be offered.
ECIV 695	Project M.S.	1 - 9 Units	Research course taken by Plan B M.S. students. Prereq: Enrolled in the ECIV Plan B MS Program.
ECIV 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
CLSC 102	Introduction to Byzantine History, 500-1500	3 Units	Development of the Byzantine empire from the emperor Constantine's conversion to Christianity and founding of the eastern capital at Constantinople to the fall of Constantinople to Turkish forces in 1453. Offered as CLSC 102 and HSTY 102. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 194	Catapults and Cavalry: Warfare in the Ancient Mediterranean	3 Units	This course examines the development of warfare in the ancient Mediterranean, including the debated origins of war in prehistory, the rise of the great armies of Assyria and Egypt, the heyday of hoplite infantry in Greece, Alexander the Great's vast conquests, and the domination of the Mediterranean by the legions of the Roman Empire. Using written, visual, and archaeological evidence from the ancient Near East, Egypt, Greece, and Rome, we will focus on three main topics: 1) warfare and ancient Mediterranean geopolitics; 2) warfare and innovation, including developments in strategy, tactics, and technology; and 3) the perception and experience of ancient Mediterranean warfare, including social, literary, and artistic responses to violent, interstate conflict. Class sessions will consist primarily of lecture with regular discussion of assigned readings. For the final project, students may either write a traditional research paper or complete a creative project such as building a working scale model of a catapult, reconstructing a historic battle in a video game platform, or creating an educational website or short documentary. All readings are in English. Offered as ANEE 194, CLSC 194, and HSTY 194. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 199	Athens: In Search of Socrates	3 Units	Students selected for their strong background or interest in Greek Civilization spend Spring Break in Athens, Greece (thanks to a collaboration between CWRU's Department of Classics and the Athens Centre).  They follow an intensive seven-day itinerary of travel, visiting major monuments and museums including the Acropolis, Delphi, Epidauros, and Aegina.  Two class sessions of instruction in modern Greek help them to interact with people they meet; but the overwhelming emphasis lies on Classical Athens, the historical-cultural setting for the emergence of Western moral philosophy.  The focus of this mini-course is on the figure of Socrates and the agenda of moral philosophy that the Athenian sage established.  Readings from Plato, Aristophanes, and Aristotle.  Via the Socratic method, students will also study Aristotle's Ethics and test the applicability of that foundational text to their own lives. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 202	Classical Mythology	3 Units	The myths of Classical Greece and Rome, their interpretation and influence. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 203	Gods and Heroes in Greek Literature	3 Units	This course examines major works of Greek literature and sets them in their historical and cultural context. Constant themes are war, wandering, tyranny, freedom, community, family, and the role of men and women within the household and the ancient city-state. Parallels with modern life and politics will be explored. Lectures and discussions. Offered as CLSC 203 and WLIT 203. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 204	Heroes and Hustlers in Roman Literature	3 Units	This course constitutes the second half of a sequence on Classical literature.  Its main themes are heroism vs. self-promotion, love vs. lust, and the struggle between democracy and tyranny.  These topics are traced in a variety of literary genres from the period of the Roman republic well into the empire.  Parallels with modern life and politics will be drawn. Offered as CLSC 204 and WLIT 204. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 206	Ancient and Medieval Spain: Prehistory to 1492	3 Units	This course focuses on the history of the Iberian peninsula from before the Roman conquest from the Iberians, Greek, and Carthaginian settlements, through Roman, Visigothic, and Muslim rule to the conquest of Ferdinand and Isabella of the last non-Christian territory on the peninsula in 1492.  The issues of conquest, frontier, cultural diversity, and change, tolerance, and intolerance will be examined.  Offered as CLSC 206 and HSTY 206. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 224	Sword and Sandal: The Classics in Film	3 Units	Gladiator.  Alexander.  The 300.  Contemporary society's continuing fascination with putting the ancient world on the big screen is undeniable; and yet the causes underlying this phenomenon are not quite so readily apparent.  In this course we will watch and discuss a number of movies about the ancient world, running the gamut from Hollywood classics such as Ben-Hur and Spartacus to more recent treatments (the aforementioned 300 and Gladiator, for starters), and from the mainstream and conventional (Clash of the Titans, Disney's Hercules) to the far-out and avant-garde (Fellini's Satyricon, anyone?).  As we do so we'll learn quite a bit about the art and economics of film, on one hand, and the ancient world, on the other.  And yet what we'll keep coming back to are the big questions: what does our fascination with the ancient Mediterranean tell us about ourselves as a society?  Why do such movies get made, and what kinds of agendas do they serve?  To what extent can we recapture the past accurately?  And if we can't, are we doomed to just endlessly projecting our own concerns and desires onto a screen, and dressing them in togas?  No knowledge of ancient languages is required for this course. Offered as CLSC 224 and WLIT 224.
CLSC 230	Art, Power, and Identity in Ancient Rome	3 Units	This course explores the history of ancient Roman art and architecture, with a particular emphasis on the Roman Empire. We will focus on situating objects and monument in the changing historical, cultural, political, and religious contexts of the Roman world. The course will introduce students to famous buildings such as the Colosseum and the Pantheon in Rome, but we will also look at lesser known but equally fascinating works that offer insight into the imaginations, aspirations, and identities of the Roman Empire's diverse population. From statues and paintings to oil lamps with erotic scenes, drinking cups with images of famous athletes, and even travel souvenirs, Romans were surrounded by images and objects that allowed them to participate in but also shape and resist a broader imperial culture. Students will consider how art and architecture shaped the complex ways that people living in the Roman world related to the empire and to more regional and local cultural traditions from Egypt and North Africa, Northern Europe, and the Near East. Finally, we will also examine how the legacy of Roman art and architecture continues to fuel debates about power, politics, and representation in the United States, including controversies over Confederate monuments. The course will include frequent visits to the Cleveland Museum of Art and other area sites such as Lakeview Cemetery (where some Cleveland patrons commissioned exact replicas of Roman monuments!). Offered as ARTH 230 and CLSC 230. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 231	Athens to Alexandria: The World of Ancient Greece	3 Units	This course constitutes the first half of a year-long sequence on classical civilization. It examines the enduring significance of the Greeks studied through their history, literature, art, and philosophy. Lectures and discussion. (For the second course in the sequence, see CLSC 232 and HSTY 232.) Offered as CLSC 231 and HSTY 231. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 232	Gods and Gladiators: The World of Ancient Rome	3 Units	The enduring significance of the Romans studied through their history, literature, art, and philosophy. Lectures and discussion. Offered as CLSC 232 and HSTY 232. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 295	Medical Terminology	3 Units	A self-paced, computer-assisted course on the classical foundations (etymology) of modern English as well as the basic principles on which roots, prefixes, and suffixes combine to give precise meanings to composite words, which is then applied toward learning medical, biomedical and scientific terminology.
CLSC 301	Ancient Philosophy	3 Units	Western philosophy from the early Greeks to the Skeptics. Emphasis on the pre-Socratics, Plato and Aristotle. Recommended preparation: PHIL 101 and consent of department. Offered as CLSC 301 and PHIL 301.
CLSC 302	Ancient Greece: Archaic, Classical, and Hellenistic Periods	3 Units	The rise of Hellenic thought and institutions from the eighth to the third centuries B.C., the rise of the polis, the evolution of democracy at Athens, the crises of the Persian and Peloponnesian Wars, fifth-century historiography, the growth of individualism, and the revival of monarchy in the Hellenistic period. Offered as CLSC 302 and HSTY 302. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 304	Ancient Rome: Republic and Empire	3 Units	Growth and development of the Roman state from the unification of Italy in the early third century B.C. to the establishment of the oriental despotism under Diocletian and Constantine. The growth of empire in the Punic Wars, the uncertain steps toward an eastern hegemony, the crisis in the Republic from the Gracchi to Caesar, the new regime of Augustus, the transformation of the leadership class in the early Empire, and the increasing dominance of the military over the civil structure. Offered as CLSC 304 and HSTY 304. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 318	Archaeological & Epigraphical Field School	3 Units	This interdisciplinary course takes place in situ in the Mediterranean and will be attached to an active archaeological project. Students will learn the methodological principles of archaeological and epigraphical fieldwork by participating in activities such as surveying, excavation, museum work, geophysical survey, artifact analysis, and other scientific techniques. In addition to work in the field and museum, students will receive an introduction to the history Greco-Roman culture through visits to major archaeological sites in the region.  Examples of active archaeological projects may vary, depending on the year. Offered as CLSC 318 and CLSC 418.
CLSC 319	Greek Tragedy: Plays and Performance in Ancient Athens	3 Units	This course provides students the opportunity to read a significant number of ancient Greek tragedies in modern English translations. We read, study, and discuss selected works by Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides, as well as selected criticism, ancient and modern, of these plays. All semester we read the plays as literature composed for performance. We study literary elements within the plays and theatrical possibilities inherent in the texts. As we read the plays, we pay close attention to the historical context and look for what each play can tell us about myth, religion, ethics, and society in ancient Athens. Finally, we give attention to the way these tragic dramas and the theater in which they were performed have continued to inspire literature and theater for thousands of years. Lectures provide historical background on the playwrights, the plays, the mythic and historical background, and possible interpretation of the texts as literature and as performance pieces. Students discuss the plays that they read in class. The course has three examinations and a final project that includes writing an essay and staging a monologue or scene from one of the tragedies. Offered as CLSC 319, CLSC 419, THTR 319, THTR 419, WLIT 319, and WLIT 419. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 320	Alexander the Great: Materials and Methods	3 Units	This course is the Classics Departmental Seminar in the SAGES sequence (normally taken in the Spring semester of a major's Junior year), though it can also be taken for regular credit in Classics or History by both undergraduate and graduate students. The seminar offers students a firm grounding in the disciplines of Classics and Ancient Near East and Egyptian Studies with an emphasis on the diverse materials (particularly primary source material), methods and approaches that can be brought to bear on the study of Ancient Near Eastern, Egyptian, and Greco-Roman antiquity. Students will read and discuss the ancient sources and contemporary scholarship on the enigmatic Alexander the Great drawn from various fields of Classics, the Ancient Near East and Egypt, including history, archaeology, art history, philosophy, gender studies, epigraphy, numismatics, and the reception of Alexander. Based upon this, they will then write a research paper that employs conventions found in the field of Classics and Ancient Near East and Egyptian Studies. Much of this training, however, will also be transferable to other fields and periods. Because the scope of the seminar moves (along with Alexander himself) beyond Europe and examines the historical foundations of the antagonism between East and West, this course qualifies as a Global and Cultural Diversity course. Offered as ANEE 316, CLSC 320, CLSC 420, HSTY 320 and HSTY 420. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 322	Theater in Ancient Rome	3 Units	This course is designed as a continuation of and companion to CLSC/THTR/WLIT 319/419 Greek Tragedy: Plays and Performance in Ancient Athens, although it may be taken without having taken, or before having taken, that course. Students in Theater in Ancient Rome will read a significant number of ancient Roman plays in modern English translation and study non-literary theatrical entertainment of the Roman Republic and Empire, that may include mime and pantomime, gladiatorial shows, political speeches, courtroom drama, and various other spectacles. The dramatic texts that we shall study include the fragments of early Latin drama, selected comedies by Plautus and Terence, and the tragedies of Seneca. We shall also consider Greek and Roman literature that comments on Roman theatrical practices. These works will be read for their literary merits and theatrical possibilities, while at the same time examining them for what they can tell us about Roman civilization. Similarly, when studying the non-literary theatrical works we shall examine historical and theatrical context including archaeological evidence from theaters and amphitheaters and material remains (masks, depictions of actors and gladiators on vases, terra cotta lamps, mosaics, etc.). Finally, while the majority of the course focuses on drama originally written in Latin and theatrical entertainments performed in ancient Rome, the course may include a brief survey of selected post-classical works indebted to the tradition of Roman drama and theater. Authors that may be studied include Hrotsvitha, Marlowe, Shakespeare, Racine, Molière, and the legacy of Roman drama and theater in contemporary stage and cinema such as Sondheim's A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum. Thus a secondary concern will be to consider how and in what ways the legacy of Roman drama and theater has continued to shape the dramatic arts since antiquity.  Offered as CLSC 322, CLSC 422, THTR 322, THTR 422, WLIT 322, and WLIT 422. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 325	Art at the Crossroads of Religion: Polytheistic, Christian, and Islamic Art in Antiquity	3 Units	People often single out the reign of Constantine (A.D. 306-337) as the point in history when Rome transformed from a polytheistic empire to a Christian empire. This course questions the strict divide between the categories of "pagan" and "Christian" in Rome in the imperial period and beyond. Through a close examination of the artistic and architectural record, students will come to understand that this dichotomy is a modern invention; for people living in the Roman Empire, religious identities were extraordinarily fluid. Indeed, traditional polytheistic religion and Christianity remained closely intertwined for centuries after Constantine "Christianized" the Empire. Moreover, religious pluralism had been a fundamental part of Roman culture since the founding of ancient Rome. We will survey a range of material culture, including public statuary, sarcophagi, silver hordes, and temples and churches. We will also examine sites such as the border city of Dura-Europos in Syria to explore how religious identities in the Roman Empire (including Judaism, early Christianity, and so-called mystery cults) intertwined even when Rome was still supposedly a "pagan" Empire. The course pays particular attention to the art and architecture produced under Constantine, whom people today often remember as Rome's first Christian emperor but who represents, in fact, a complex amalgam of polytheistic and monotheistic practices and identities. We will also explore how Christian art slowly but ultimately became the predominant visual culture in the Roman Empire. Finally, we will examine how Early Islamic art and architecture exploited the Greco-Roman visual tradition to the ends of this new religion. Offered as ARTH 325, ARTH 425 and CLSC 325. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 326	Rome on Site: The Archaeology of the Eternal City	3 Units	This course offers the opportunity to examine firsthand Roman remains spanning 500 years of the city's history. For three weeks we will explore all sections of Rome and discover how different spheres of Roman life, such as religion, politics, leisure, and death, combined to shape one of the most renowned cityscapes of the ancient Mediterranean world. The course constitutes a mix of museum and site visits to expose us to the artifacts that help us interpret the Roman world, including art and other types of material culture, and the monumental architecture dominating much of Rome to this day. We will also explore important sites outside of the city, including Rome's remarkably well-preserved port at Ostia, the Emperor Hadrian's magnificent villa at Tivoli, and an optional visit to Pompeii and Herculaneum during an extended weekend. Some of the questions we will be asking when visiting the sites include: How did the expansion of the Roman Empire influence the stylistic repertories of the capital's artists and architects? How did the changing political environment shape the topography of the city from Republic to Empire? How can we read political messages and propaganda in the ancient structures? How did (and does) Rome live among, use, and reuse ancient remains? Students will be expected to be active participants in the daily tours. All students will be presenting on various structures as we come to them (topics to be assigned in advance of the trip). Graduate students are responsible for leading a day tour (with my assistance) - to create the itinerary and develop the thematic framework. Grades will be based on participation on site, presentations, and a paper.   Offered as CLSC 326 and CLSC 426. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 329	Marvels of Rome: Monuments and Their Decoration in the Roman Empire	3 Units	This course examines some of the most famous monuments of the Roman Empire, including Nero's Golden House, the Colosseum, the Pantheon, Hadrian's Villa at Tivoli, and the lavish villa of Piazza Armerina in Sicily. We will study each monument in depth, delving into the architecture, paintings, sculptures, mosaics, and social functions of each monument. Students will learn how to analyze artistic and archaeological evidence, ancient textual evidence (poems, prose, and inscriptions), and secondary scholarship to reconstruct the visual appearances and historical and cultural contexts of the monuments in questions. Throughout the course, students will gain a new appreciation and deeper understanding of some of the most iconic buildings of the classical tradition. Offered as ARTH 329, ARTH 429, and CLSC 329. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 333	Greek and Roman Painting	3 Units	Greek vase painting, Etruscan tomb painting and Roman wall painting. The development of monumental painting in antiquity. Offered as ARTH 333, CLSC 333, and ARTH 433.
CLSC 336	Representations of War in Ancient Rome	3 Units	Few societies in history have been as militaristic as ancient Rome--or as proud of their warrior culture. This course examines the many ways that Romans constructed and contested their conceptions of war from the founding of the Roman Republic in 509 B.C.E. to the reign of Constantine (306-337 C.E.). Why did Romans choose to represent war in certain ways, and how did these artistic representations shape Romans' military values? What can the visual record tell us about how different groups (soldiers, women, slaves) experienced war in the Roman world? We will explore major public monuments in the city of Rome (including triumphal arches and the Colosseum) and private objects (such as silver drinking vessels) to observe how Roman militarism pervaded different walks of life. We will also examine monuments on the edges of Rome's empire, such as the towering trophies in modern France and Romania, to explore how works of art and architecture mediated the relationship between Romans and the peoples they conquered. Students will be encouraged to think about how art and architecture contributed to the construction of militarism as a chief Roman value, but also about how visual representations provided an important means to debate the value of Rome's military efforts, to subvert Rome's rigidly hierarchical social order, and to grapple with what it meant to "be Roman" as wars transformed Rome from a small city in Italy to a massive, pan-Mediterranean empire. After exploring Romans' conceptions of war and victory, students also may ask whether the common comparison between the Roman Empire and modern America is appropriate. Offered as ARTH 336, ARTH 436, CLSC 336 and CLSC 436. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 337	Ancient Medicine	3 Units	This course offers a general survey of the history of medicine from its origins in pre-historical times to Galen (2nd c. CE) with a view to gaining a better understanding of the path that eventually lead to modern medical practice. The various medical systems considered, including the ancient Babylonian, Egyptian, Jewish, Chinese, Ayurvedic, Greek and Roman traditions, will be examined through the study of primary and secondary sources, while key conceptual developments and practices are identified within their cultural and social context. Special issues, such as epidemics, women's medicine, and surgery, are also explored and discussed. Offered as ANEE 337, CLSC 337, CLSC 437, HSTY 337, and HSTY 437. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 344	Archaeology of the Ancient World	3 Units	This course examines the great civilizations of the ancient world, particularly those of the Ancient Near East, Egypt, Greece and Rome, through the archaeological record. Each of these geographic areas and their respective cultures will be individually explored, but also examined within a broader historical context. Particular focus will be placed on the social, political, religious, and economic ideas that were exchanged across Mesopotamia, Anatolia, the Levant and the Mediterranean and the influence this interconnectivity had on these ancient societies.  Offered as ANEE 344, ANEE 444, ANTH 344, ANTH 444, ARTH 344, ARTH 444, CLSC 344 and CLSC 444. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 381	Classics Senior Capstone	3 Units	The capstone is the final requirement of the SAGES program and is normally taken in the fall semester of senior year.  It involves an independent study paper resulting from exploration of a topic chosen in consultation with the student's capstone advisor, who will regularly review progress on the project.  In the capstone students employ, integrate, and demonstrate analytical, rhetorical, and practical skills developed and honed through the SAGES curriculum as well as their major or minor studies.  The Capstone Project has both a written and an oral component: oral presentation and argumentation will be stressed.  The product of the capstone may take different forms: there will always be a written component, but other forms of expression are also encouraged, such as a webpage or poster for a poster session.  As for the kind of project that might be done: students interested in literature might work on an annotated translation of a classical text; archaeology students might produce a virtual exhibit centered on a specific site or problem. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: CLSC 231 and CLSC 232, plus courses prescribed for each track of the major.
CLSC 382	Senior Honors Thesis	3 Units	A course of independent study and research culminating in the preparation of a thesis on a topic approved by the supervising faculty member.  Enrollment in this course must be approved by the Chair of the Department. Prereq: CLSC 381.
CLSC 395	Directed Readings	1 - 3 Units	Readings in English on a topic of interest to the student and acceptable to the instructor. Designed and completed under the supervision of the instructor with whom the student wishes to work.
CLSC 418	Archaeological & Epigraphical Field School	3 Units	This interdisciplinary course takes place in situ in the Mediterranean and will be attached to an active archaeological project. Students will learn the methodological principles of archaeological and epigraphical fieldwork by participating in activities such as surveying, excavation, museum work, geophysical survey, artifact analysis, and other scientific techniques. In addition to work in the field and museum, students will receive an introduction to the history Greco-Roman culture through visits to major archaeological sites in the region.  Examples of active archaeological projects may vary, depending on the year. Offered as CLSC 318 and CLSC 418.
CLSC 419	Greek Tragedy: Plays and Performance in Ancient Athens	3 Units	This course provides students the opportunity to read a significant number of ancient Greek tragedies in modern English translations. We read, study, and discuss selected works by Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides, as well as selected criticism, ancient and modern, of these plays. All semester we read the plays as literature composed for performance. We study literary elements within the plays and theatrical possibilities inherent in the texts. As we read the plays, we pay close attention to the historical context and look for what each play can tell us about myth, religion, ethics, and society in ancient Athens. Finally, we give attention to the way these tragic dramas and the theater in which they were performed have continued to inspire literature and theater for thousands of years. Lectures provide historical background on the playwrights, the plays, the mythic and historical background, and possible interpretation of the texts as literature and as performance pieces. Students discuss the plays that they read in class. The course has three examinations and a final project that includes writing an essay and staging a monologue or scene from one of the tragedies. Offered as CLSC 319, CLSC 419, THTR 319, THTR 419, WLIT 319, and WLIT 419. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 420	Alexander the Great: Materials and Methods	3 Units	This course is the Classics Departmental Seminar in the SAGES sequence (normally taken in the Spring semester of a major's Junior year), though it can also be taken for regular credit in Classics or History by both undergraduate and graduate students. The seminar offers students a firm grounding in the disciplines of Classics and Ancient Near East and Egyptian Studies with an emphasis on the diverse materials (particularly primary source material), methods and approaches that can be brought to bear on the study of Ancient Near Eastern, Egyptian, and Greco-Roman antiquity. Students will read and discuss the ancient sources and contemporary scholarship on the enigmatic Alexander the Great drawn from various fields of Classics, the Ancient Near East and Egypt, including history, archaeology, art history, philosophy, gender studies, epigraphy, numismatics, and the reception of Alexander. Based upon this, they will then write a research paper that employs conventions found in the field of Classics and Ancient Near East and Egyptian Studies. Much of this training, however, will also be transferable to other fields and periods. Because the scope of the seminar moves (along with Alexander himself) beyond Europe and examines the historical foundations of the antagonism between East and West, this course qualifies as a Global and Cultural Diversity course. Offered as ANEE 316, CLSC 320, CLSC 420, HSTY 320 and HSTY 420. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 422	Theater in Ancient Rome	3 Units	This course is designed as a continuation of and companion to CLSC/THTR/WLIT 319/419 Greek Tragedy: Plays and Performance in Ancient Athens, although it may be taken without having taken, or before having taken, that course. Students in Theater in Ancient Rome will read a significant number of ancient Roman plays in modern English translation and study non-literary theatrical entertainment of the Roman Republic and Empire, that may include mime and pantomime, gladiatorial shows, political speeches, courtroom drama, and various other spectacles. The dramatic texts that we shall study include the fragments of early Latin drama, selected comedies by Plautus and Terence, and the tragedies of Seneca. We shall also consider Greek and Roman literature that comments on Roman theatrical practices. These works will be read for their literary merits and theatrical possibilities, while at the same time examining them for what they can tell us about Roman civilization. Similarly, when studying the non-literary theatrical works we shall examine historical and theatrical context including archaeological evidence from theaters and amphitheaters and material remains (masks, depictions of actors and gladiators on vases, terra cotta lamps, mosaics, etc.). Finally, while the majority of the course focuses on drama originally written in Latin and theatrical entertainments performed in ancient Rome, the course may include a brief survey of selected post-classical works indebted to the tradition of Roman drama and theater. Authors that may be studied include Hrotsvitha, Marlowe, Shakespeare, Racine, Molière, and the legacy of Roman drama and theater in contemporary stage and cinema such as Sondheim's A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum. Thus a secondary concern will be to consider how and in what ways the legacy of Roman drama and theater has continued to shape the dramatic arts since antiquity.  Offered as CLSC 322, CLSC 422, THTR 322, THTR 422, WLIT 322, and WLIT 422. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 426	Rome on Site: The Archaeology of the Eternal City	3 Units	This course offers the opportunity to examine firsthand Roman remains spanning 500 years of the city's history. For three weeks we will explore all sections of Rome and discover how different spheres of Roman life, such as religion, politics, leisure, and death, combined to shape one of the most renowned cityscapes of the ancient Mediterranean world. The course constitutes a mix of museum and site visits to expose us to the artifacts that help us interpret the Roman world, including art and other types of material culture, and the monumental architecture dominating much of Rome to this day. We will also explore important sites outside of the city, including Rome's remarkably well-preserved port at Ostia, the Emperor Hadrian's magnificent villa at Tivoli, and an optional visit to Pompeii and Herculaneum during an extended weekend. Some of the questions we will be asking when visiting the sites include: How did the expansion of the Roman Empire influence the stylistic repertories of the capital's artists and architects? How did the changing political environment shape the topography of the city from Republic to Empire? How can we read political messages and propaganda in the ancient structures? How did (and does) Rome live among, use, and reuse ancient remains? Students will be expected to be active participants in the daily tours. All students will be presenting on various structures as we come to them (topics to be assigned in advance of the trip). Graduate students are responsible for leading a day tour (with my assistance) - to create the itinerary and develop the thematic framework. Grades will be based on participation on site, presentations, and a paper.   Offered as CLSC 326 and CLSC 426. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 436	Representations of War in Ancient Rome	3 Units	Few societies in history have been as militaristic as ancient Rome--or as proud of their warrior culture. This course examines the many ways that Romans constructed and contested their conceptions of war from the founding of the Roman Republic in 509 B.C.E. to the reign of Constantine (306-337 C.E.). Why did Romans choose to represent war in certain ways, and how did these artistic representations shape Romans' military values? What can the visual record tell us about how different groups (soldiers, women, slaves) experienced war in the Roman world? We will explore major public monuments in the city of Rome (including triumphal arches and the Colosseum) and private objects (such as silver drinking vessels) to observe how Roman militarism pervaded different walks of life. We will also examine monuments on the edges of Rome's empire, such as the towering trophies in modern France and Romania, to explore how works of art and architecture mediated the relationship between Romans and the peoples they conquered. Students will be encouraged to think about how art and architecture contributed to the construction of militarism as a chief Roman value, but also about how visual representations provided an important means to debate the value of Rome's military efforts, to subvert Rome's rigidly hierarchical social order, and to grapple with what it meant to "be Roman" as wars transformed Rome from a small city in Italy to a massive, pan-Mediterranean empire. After exploring Romans' conceptions of war and victory, students also may ask whether the common comparison between the Roman Empire and modern America is appropriate. Offered as ARTH 336, ARTH 436, CLSC 336 and CLSC 436. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 437	Ancient Medicine	3 Units	This course offers a general survey of the history of medicine from its origins in pre-historical times to Galen (2nd c. CE) with a view to gaining a better understanding of the path that eventually lead to modern medical practice. The various medical systems considered, including the ancient Babylonian, Egyptian, Jewish, Chinese, Ayurvedic, Greek and Roman traditions, will be examined through the study of primary and secondary sources, while key conceptual developments and practices are identified within their cultural and social context. Special issues, such as epidemics, women's medicine, and surgery, are also explored and discussed. Offered as ANEE 337, CLSC 337, CLSC 437, HSTY 337, and HSTY 437. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 444	Archaeology of the Ancient World	3 Units	This course examines the great civilizations of the ancient world, particularly those of the Ancient Near East, Egypt, Greece and Rome, through the archaeological record. Each of these geographic areas and their respective cultures will be individually explored, but also examined within a broader historical context. Particular focus will be placed on the social, political, religious, and economic ideas that were exchanged across Mesopotamia, Anatolia, the Levant and the Mediterranean and the influence this interconnectivity had on these ancient societies.  Offered as ANEE 344, ANEE 444, ANTH 344, ANTH 444, ARTH 344, ARTH 444, CLSC 344 and CLSC 444. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
CLSC 481	Special Studies	1 - 6 Units	Subject matter varies according to need.
CLSC 492	Graduate Certificate Thesis	3 Units	This course will be focused on the independent writing of a substantial term paper under the supervision of an advisor. It is required for the completion of the Graduate Certificate.
CLSC 493	Graduate Certificate Presentation	1 Unit	This course will involve the presentation of the term paper completed and refined during CLSC 492. Prereq: CLSC 492.
CLSC 651	Thesis M.A.	1 - 6 Units	Limited to M.A. candidates actively engaged in the research and writing of their theses.  Credit as arranged.
CMED 401	Intro to Clinical Research and Scientific Writing	3 Units	This seminar brings in numerous experts to cover a variety of essential issues and concepts in clinical research and scientific writing.  The overarching goal is for students to produce a short but well-crafted research proposal.  Topics for reading and discussion include general principles of research design and proposal development; key concepts and issues in biostatistical science for study planning, data management, analysis, interpretation, and presentation; modern medical library informatics; ethical issues in clinical research and necessary rigmarole; technical writing emphasizing research proposals; designing studies of diagnostic tests; outcomes research and medical decision making; clinical genomics research.
CMED 402	Statistical Science for Medical Research	3 Units	A rigorous, practical introduction to core concepts and methods in statistical planning, managing, and analyzing data, and interpreting and communicating biostatistical information. Seminar sessions: discuss readings, work through realistic examples using popular commercial software. Project sessions: individuals in small groups discuss their own examples and receive on-the-spot feedback, Topics: types of data and common distributions; database and statistical software; understanding and describing data with simple statistics and effective tables and graphics; statistical transforms (log, logit) and what they imply, basic inference tests, confidence intervals, and related sample-size analyses involving categorical data (analyzing proportions), ordinal data (analyzing ranks), continuous data (analyzing means), and time-to-event data with censoring. A substantial introduction to statistical modeling unifies seemingly diverse methods to induce a cohesive, flexible, and broad understanding of biostatistics.  Medical students enrolled in CRSP must complete CCLCM Introduction to Clinical Research, IBIS 431 and IBIS 490 to satisfy the CRSP 401, 402 and 403 series. Prereq: Must be enrolled in School of Medicine.
CMED 403	Introduction to Clinical Epidemiology	3 Units	Using multiple learning modalities, including case-based seminars, computer-based interactive learning, journal club, and readings from texts as well as contemporary clinical literature, students will receive a rigorous introduction to methods of research in clinical epidemiology. Topics to be covered will include human subjects protections; legal and ethical components of clinical research; measures of disease frequency; basics of clinical study design; nature of and analysis of risk factors; cohort study design and analysis; case-control study design and analysis; confounding; interaction; bias; survey research; diagnostic tests; disease screening; design, analysis, and reporting of clinical trials; meta-analysis; decision analysis; cost-effectiveness analysis; and a brief introduction to health services research.  Medical students enrolled in CRSP must complete CCLCM Introduction to Clinical Research, IBIS 431, and IBIS 490 to satisfy the CRSP 401, 402, and 403 series. Prereq: Must be enrolled in School of Medicine.
CMED 404	Clinical Research Seminars	1 Unit	The Clinical Research Seminars series is intended to give students a broad exposure to issues unique to clinical research as well as career development. Students attend seminars on relevant clinical research topics offered either on the Case or CCF campuses, and will write a short summary of each seminar attended. A total of 12-14 one-hour seminars per semester is required for successful completion of the course. Students are expected to take two semesters. Prereq: Must be enrolled in School of Medicine and consent of CCLCM Office.
CMED 405	Clinical Research Seminars	1 Unit	The Clinical Research Seminars series is intended to give students a broad exposure to issues unique to clinical research as well as career development. Students attend seminars on relevant clinical research topics offered either on the Case or CCF campuses, and will write a short summary of each seminar attended. A total of 12-14 one-hour seminars per semester is required for successful completion of the course. Students are expected to take two semesters. Prereq: Must be enrolled in School of Medicine and consent of CCLCM Office.
CMED 450	Clinical Trials	3 Units	Design, organization and operation of randomized controlled clinical trials and intervention studies.  Topics include legal and ethical issues in design; application of concepts of controls; masking and randomization; steps required for quality data collection; monitoring for evidence of adverse or beneficial treatment effects; elements of organizational structure; sample size calculations and data analysis procedures and mistakes. Prereq: Must be enrolled in School of Medicine.
CMED 458	Statistical Modeling with Applications in Clinical Research	3 Units	Statistical modeling methods and strategies for analyzing data in clinical research, including randomized and non-randomized clinical trials.  Standard Normal-theory, logistic, and Cox proportional hazard regression methods, emphasizing that these tools provide a unified schema to use linear models for continuous and categorical predictors of outcomes that are continuous, binary, or time-to-event with censoring.  Repeated measures analysis using summary measures versus modern mixed models.  Spline models for non-linear relationships. Extending the logistic model for ordinal outcomes.  Propensity analysis.  Software: R. Prereq: Must be enrolled in School of Medicine and consent of CCLCM Office.
CMED 500	Scientific Integrity in Biomedical Research	0 Unit	This course covers a wide variety of topics in ethics for biomedical researchers including Institutional Review Boards for human and animal experimentation, requirements of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), informed consent, and de-identification of patient data in research databases.  Issues of data ownership, responsibilities of authorship, and conflicts of interest are also discussed. Prereq: Enrolled in School of Medicine.  Must have completed 1.5 years.
CMED 601	Clinical Research Project	9 Units	Clinical research project leading toward the completion of a type B Masters of Science in Biomedical Investigation - CRSP.
CRSP 401	Introduction to Clinical Research Summer Series	3 Units	This course is designed to familiarize one with the language and concepts of clinical investigation and statistical computing, as well as provide opportunities for problem-solving, and practical application of the information derived from the lectures.  The material is organized along the internal logic of the research process, beginning with mechanisms of choosing a research question and moving into the information needed to design the protocol, implement it, analyze the findings, and draw and disseminate the conclusion(s). Prereq: M.D., R.N., Ph.D., D.D.S., health professionals.
CRSP 402	Study Design and Epidemiologic Methods	3 Units	This course will cover the methods used in the conduct of epidemiologic and health services research and considers how epidemiologic studies may be designed to maximize etiologic inferences. Topics include: measures of disease frequency, measures of effect, cross-sectional studies, case-control studies, cohort studies, randomized controlled trials, confounding, bias, effect modification, and select topics. Recommended preparation: CRSP 401 or permission of instructor.
CRSP 406	Introduction to R Programming	3 Units	This course will provide students with an introduction to R. Major topics will include session management, data objects, reading and writing data, restructuring and combining data frames, handling missing data, working with dates, statistical analysis concepts, and R traditional graphics. Students will learn R programming conventions, how to create, manage and edit R scripts programs, and how to interpret output. Each class will consist of a demo on each lesson followed by a practice session when time permits. Small research datasets will be used both in class examples and in the exercises for each lesson. Students will be expected to complete all homework assignments on time and submit a take-home final exam.
CRSP 410	Independent Study in Clinical Research	1 - 3 Units	Independent Study in Clinical Research enables the student to undertake study of advanced topics in clinical research that are not offered as standing courses at Case Western Reserve University.  The student(s) and a member of the Clinical Research Scholars Program faculty, or another faculty member at CWRU, submit a 1-2 page proposal for independent study to the CRSP Program Director.  The proposal should include a descriptive title (e.g., research method or clinical topic area) to be studied; a list of up to 5 student-centered objectives of the study; how the subject matter will be learned; and how success in achieving the objectives will be measured (e.g., manuscript, essay, grant proposal, or other written product; examination, etc.).  It is expected that there will be at least one contact hour per week for each credit hour requested.
CRSP 412	Communication in Clinical Research - Grant Writing	1 Unit	Written communication is a critical skill in clinical science. We disseminate our work to others through publications, and we obtain the resources to conduct research through grant proposals. This course has been developed for Kl2 and CRSP scholars. The course focuses on writing grant proposals and, in particular, specific sections of an NIH-style grant. However, the principles discussed in the course apply to any type of proposal. Prereq: CRSP 401 or equivalent.
CRSP 413	Communication in Clinical Research - Oral Presentation, Posters, and the Mass Media	1 Unit	To move their work forward, investigators must be able to present their research effectively to both scientific and lay audiences. Although "the written word" is probably the first medium that comes to mind when we think of communication in scientific circles, other modes of communication are also vital. The main objective of this course is to help scholars improve their oral and poster presentation skills, as well as interaction with the mass media. This objective will be achieved through a combination of didactic sessions, readings, and presentations by the students. Prereq: CRSP 401 or equivalent.
CRSP 431	Statistical Methods I	3 Units	Application of statistical techniques with particular emphasis on problems in the biomedical sciences.  Basic probability theory, random variables, and distribution functions.  Point and interval estimation, regression, and correlation.  Problems whose solution involves using packaged statistical programs.  First part of year-long sequence. Offered as ANAT 431, BIOL 431, CRSP 431, PQHS 431 and MPHP 431.
CRSP 432	Statistical Methods II	3 Units	Methods of analysis of variance, regression and analysis of quantitative data.  Emphasis on computer solution of problems drawn from the biomedical sciences.  Design of experiments, power of tests, and adequacy of models.  Offered as BIOL 432, PQHS 432, CRSP 432 and MPHP 432. Prereq: CRSP 431.
CRSP 440	Translational & Patient-Oriented Research Theory	3 Units	Clinical (patient-oriented) and translational science has emerged as a new scientific discipline aimed to accelerate scientific discovery into effective practice.  This course provides an overview of the theoretical framework, rationale, process, methodologies, and ethics of clinical and translational research. An integral feature of this course is the participation of a multidisciplinary teaching team, whose expertise and perspective will contribute to providing real-world insights into the complexities of translational and patient-oriented research.
CRSP 450	Seminar in Multidisciplinary Clinical & Translational Research	0 Unit	The purpose of this monthly seminar is to introduce students to the processes and challenges of multidisciplinary clinical/translational science, through which discoveries in the laboratory or in early clinical studies are transformed into interventions, treatments, and ultimately, best practices and policies on national and international levels. The seminar will use a case-based approach. Examination of active projects at Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, the MetroHealth Medical Center, University Hospitals Case Medical Center, and the Louis Stokes Veterans Administration Medical Center will enable students to learn first-hand about clinical translational science in action.
CRSP 500	Design and Analysis of Observational Studies	3 Units	An observational study investigates treatments, policies or exposures and the effects that they cause, but it differs from an experiment because the investigator cannot control assignment.  We introduce appropriate design, data collection and analysis methods for such studies, to help students design and interpret their own studies, and those of others in their field.  Technical formalities are minimized, and the presentations will focus on the practical application of the ideas.  A course project involves the completion of an observational study, and substantial use of the R statistical software.  Topics include randomized experiments and how they differ from observational studies, planning and design for observational studies, adjustments for overt bias, sensitivity analysis, methods for detecting hidden bias, and focus on propensity score methods for selection bias adjustment, including multivariate matching, stratification, weighting and regression adjustments.  Recommended preparation: a working knowledge of multiple regression, some familiarity with logistic regression, with some exposure to fitting regression models in R. Offered as CRSP 500 and PQHS 500.
CRSP 501	Team Science - Working in Interdisciplinary Research Teams	1 Unit	This course will assist learners to understand how different professional disciplines, each representing a body of scientific knowledge, can best work together to develop and disseminate translational knowledge. Learners will develop a set of skills specific to be an effective member and leader of an interdisciplinary research team, including  working with different value and knowledge sets across disciplines, understanding the mental models of other disciplines, creating shared mental models, running effective meetings, managing conflict, giving and receiving feedback, and group decision making techniques. Using the small group seminar approach and case studies, learners will practice individual and group communication, reflective and self-assessment techniques, and engage in experiential learning activities regarding effective teamwork in interdisciplinary research teams. Techniques to increase group creativity and frame new insights will be discussed.
CRSP 502	Leadership Skills for Clinical Research Teams	2 Units	Leadership Assessment and Development is for participants to learn a method for assessing their knowledge, abilities, and values relevant to management; and for developing and implementing plans for acquiring new management related knowledge and abilities. The major goals of this course include generating data through a variety of assessment methods designed to reveal your interests, abilities, values, and knowledge related to leadership effectiveness; learning how to interpret this assessment data and use it to design/plan developmental activities; small group sharing of insights from the various assessments. Recommended preparation: K grant appointment or consent of instructor.
CRSP 503	Innovation and Entrepreneurship	1 Unit	The purpose of this module is to acquaint and ultimately engage clinical researchers with the business of innovation and entrepreneurship. Goals include: (1) to provide researchers with many of the skills that they would need to translate academic research into commercial uses: (2) to sensitize clinical researchers to the goals of the business community and facilitate their ability to work with the private sector on technology development; and (3) to make clinical researchers aware of the processes of academic technology development and transfer. Sessions consist of a lecture and case discussion facilitated by one of the co-directors.
CRSP 504	Managing Research Records - A System's Approach	2 - 3 Units	This course will provide an approach to managing data for research studies.  Major topics include a discussion of a research study system including database design and development, data management, and clinical data management; how to evaluate the data needs of a study including the impact of required regulations; summary of key regulations; the role of the data manager including protocol review, development of a data management plan, CRF design, data cleaning, locking studies and ensuring best practices.  Each session will include a lecture, class discussion, and student presentation.
CRSP 510	Health Disparities	3 Units	This course aims to provide theoretical and application tools for students from many disciplinary backgrounds to conduct research and develop interventions to reduce health disparities. The course will be situated contextually within the historical record of the United States, reviewing social, political, economic, cultural, legal, and ethical theories related to disparities in general, with a central focus on health disparities. Several frameworks regarding health disparities will be used for investigating and discussing the empirical evidence on disparities among other subgroups (e.g., the poor, women, uninsured, disabled, and non-English speaking populations) will also be included and discussed. Students will be expected to develop a research proposal (observational, clinical, and/or intervention) rooted in their disciplinary background that will incorporate materials from the various perspectives presented throughout the course, with the objective of developing and reinforcing a more comprehensive approach to current practices within their fields.  Offered as CRSP 510, PQHS 510, MPHP 510, NURS 510, and SASS 510.
CRSP 529	FDA Regulation in Entrepreneurship and Clinical Research	0 - 3 Units	The FDA Regulation in Entrepreneurship and Clinical Research course is designed to provide foundational knowledge in the FDA approval and regulatory process while highlighting scientific, clinical, ethical, and other related emergent factors for consideration. The course includes a series of lecture-based classes delivered by content experts and interdisciplinary team-based learning discussions of case studies designed for the application of lecture content. Students who elect to take the course for three credits as opposed to one credit will go through the process of reviewing an example Investigational New Drug (IND) or Investigational Drug Exemption (IDE) Application (midterm project) and preparing an IND or IDE for submission (final project) with the guidance of nationally renowned experts in FDA regulation and law. The primary goal of this course is that upon completion, students will be able to take the knowledge gained from content experts and apply it to facilitate the movement of their current or future technologies through the FDA approval process.  Offered as CRSP 529, PHRM 529 and RGME 529.
CRSP 550	Meta-Analysis & Evidence Synthesis	2 - 3 Units	Systematic reviews use reproducible methods to systematically search the literature and synthesize the results of a specific topic area. Meta-analysis is a specific analytic technique used to pool results of individual studies. Systematic reviews are useful ways to establish one's knowledge in a particular field of study, and can highlight gaps in research which can be pursued in future work. They can also inform the background of a grant.   This course is designed to introduce students to the methods of conducting a high quality systematic review and meta-analysis of intervention studies. We will cover the design, methods, and analytic techniques involved in systematic reviews. These concepts will prepare students to conduct their own systematic review or evaluate the systematic reviews of others. Sessions will be lectures, labs, and presentations.    Topics include developing a search strategy, abstracting key data, synthesizing the results qualitatively, meta-analytic techniques, grading the quality of studies, grading the strength of the evidence, and manuscript preparation specific to systematic reviews and meta-analysis of intervention studies.    Caveat: If you would like to conduct a systematic review of your own that can be published after the course ends, you will need to have several other class members or colleagues willing to work with you on the project. The systematic review should be on a topic where you expect no more than 20-30 included studies in order to be able to complete the review soon after the course ends.  Offered as CRSP 550 and PQHS 550. Prereq: CRSP 401, PQHS 431, MPHP 405, NURS 532, or Requisites Not Met permission.
CRSP 560	Special Topics in Clinical Research	1 Unit	In this 1 credit hour course, students will explore particular issues and themes related to Clinical Research. The course content will vary and is designed to explore content not covered in other CRSP courses or to expand student knowledge on topics introduced by other CRSP courses.
CRSP 601	Research Practicum	1 - 9 Units	Research practicum and/or laboratory rotation.
CRSP 603	Research Ethics and Regulation	1 - 2 Units	This course is designed to introduce students to the ethical, policy, and legal issues raised by research involving human subjects.  It is intended for law students, post-doctoral trainees in health-related disciplines and other students in relevant fields.  Topics include (among others): regulation and monitoring of research; research in third-world nations; research with special populations; stem cell and genetic research; research to combat bioterrorism; scientific misconduct; conflicts of interest; commercialization and intellectual property; and the use of deception and placebos.  Course will meet once per week for 2 hours throughout the semester.  Grades will be given based on class participation and a series of group projects and individual short writing assignments. Offered as BETH 503, CRSP 603 and LAWS 5225.
CRSP 650	Capstone Experience	3 Units	The Capstone will provide hands-on experience in conducting clinical research. To complete the Capstone project the student will register for 3 credit hours and dedicate at least 160 hours over the course of a semester, typically 20 hours per week for 8 weeks. Under the guidance of a Capstone Advisor the student will develop a Capstone project or internship/practicum, which may take diverse forms:  A study project; Internship/Practicum: A combination of tasks necessary for the successful implementation of a study, such as attending team meetings, developing an IRB protocol, designing study forms, assisting with recruitment, study procedures, data management/cleaning, descriptive analysis, secondary analysis; Another format, with approval of CRSP director and Capstone Advisor.
CRSP 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
CRSP 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	Ph.D. Dissertation credits. Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
COGS 101	Introduction to Cognitive Science	3 Units	This course introduces students to the field of cognitive science.  Cognitive scientists are interested in the nature of the human mind--basically, we ask how humans think.  This is a huge question, and has been addressed in one way or another by pretty much every academic field.  Cognitive science tries to unite work from many different fields, including computer science, neuroscience, psychology, linguistics, philosophy, music, art, and literary theory.  In this course, you'll get a basic introduction to some of the topics that are central to human cognition, such as intelligence, categorization, language, and creativity.  We'll ask what can be gained by taking an integrated, cognitive scientific approach to these topics.
COGS 102	Introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience	3 Units	A survey of the fundamental methods, findings, and theories that attempt to understand the human mind from a neuroscientific standpoint.  The course provides the student with background knowledge of brain processes underlying such psychological phenomena as consciousness, sensation, perception, thought, language, and voluntary action.  Since many fields of neuroscience have contributed to cognitive neuroscience, the approach of this course is cross-disciplinary.  It introduces theories and data from clinical and experimental neuropsychology, brain imaging, neuroelectric and neuromagnetic brain activity, the neuroscience of language, and behavioral neuroscience, among other fields.
COGS 201	Human Cognition in Evolution and Development	3 Units	COGS 201 covers mind unfolding in time, including the fundamental methods, findings, and theories of human mental phylo- and onto-genesis. It provides the student with background knowledge about the unfolding of cognitive structures and functions over time, in both the deep temporal perspective of evolution (measured across many lifetimes) and the shorter one of development (measured within single lifetimes). The approach of the course is cross-disciplinary, including approaches that come from anthropology, archaeology, philosophy, computing science, comparative psychology, primatology, and comparative linguistics, among others.
COGS 202	Cognition and Culture	3 Units	This course studies the human mind in its natural environment: culture. It covers the fundamental methods, findings, and theories that attempt to understand the growth and evolution of cognition from either a social science or humanistic standpoint. It provides the student with background knowledge of theories of human cultural evolution and change, of the relationship between the cognizing individual and larger social-cognitive structures, and of such phenomena as distributed networks, cooperative mental work, and the phenomenology of human experience. Many disciplines have contributed to this knowledge; hence the approach of this course is cross-disciplinary, including ideas from cultural anthropology, literary studies, art and art history, musicology, philosophy, and the history of technology, among others.
COGS 205	Cognition and Design	3 Units	Urbanism is design; architecture is design; of course, the aesthetic shaping of artifacts (such as computers, cars, and coffee machines) is design.  Configuring surfaces, volumes, and portions of space in special ways, creating and changing formats for things and places that allow cultural practices to unfold while delimiting them, are essential 'designing" endeavors of human civilization and are, necessarily, activities based on the cognitive capacities and constraints of our species.  We 'cognize' the human world in terms and frames of 'designed' surroundings.  Design is a basic expressive activity, by which we interact with our artificial and natural surroundings and create 'interfaces' between mind and reality, thus upholding and interpretable world.  Landscapes and cityscapes, work spaces of all sorts, buildings and parks, exteriors and interiors of homes, factories, institutions, and temples; furniture, artifacts such as machines, tools, weapons, symbolic objects, even the configuration ('building') of our own bodies, are design.  An inquiry into cultural cognition, aiming to understand how humans as socio-cultural beings think and feel, therefore needs to explore this dimension of spatial expressivity and to acknowledge it as a constitutive fact of human meaning production; it needs to study the aesthetic and pragmatic, political and historical, philosophical and religious, and simply everyday practical, semiotic aspects of this basic form of human creativity.  This course will focus on spatial expressivity--design--in several primary keys and scales, including design for learning; design for verbal and technical communication, interaction, and commerce; design for expressions of authority and deliberation; and design for emotional display.
COGS 206	Theory of Cognitive Linguistics I	3 Units	This is the first course in a two-course sequence presenting theory and practice of cognitive linguistics. Offered as COGS 206 and COGS 406.
COGS 215	Words and Mind	3 Units	There is something fascinating and special about words. They are the aspect of language that everyone knows about and pays attention to--and every academic discipline with an interest in language has something to say about them! The sheer number of words known by every speaker of any human language is quite vast (and the exact number is a mystery). In this class we will learn about words in all their aspects, and see what the wide weirdness of words can help us understand about the human mind. Subjects covered include the question of what makes a word (is "ouch" a word? "ain't"?); word origins; taboo words; words and memory; word boundaries; and word games, puns, and puzzles.
COGS 272	Morality and Mind	3 Units	Recent research in cognitive science challenges ethical perspectives founded on the assumption that rationality is key to moral knowledge or that morality is the product of divine revelation.  Bedrock moral concepts like free will, rights, and moral agency also have been questioned.  In light of such critiques, how can we best understand moral philosophy and religious ethics?  Is ethics primarily informed by nature or by culture?  Or is ethics informed by both?  This course examines 1) ways in which cognitive science--and related fields such as evolutionary biology--impact traditional moral perspectives, and 2) how the study of moral philosophy and comparative ethics forces reconsideration of broad cognitive science theories about the nature of ethics.  The course examines the concept of free will as a case study in applying these interpretive viewpoints.  Interdisciplinary readings include literature from moral philosophy, religious ethics, cognitive science, and evolutionary biology.   Offered as COGS 272 and RLGN 272.
COGS 301	Special Topics in Cognitive Science	3 Units	Special Topics in Cognitive Science.  Topics vary.  Permission of department is required. Offered as COGS 301 and COGS 401.
COGS 305	Social Cognition and the Brain	3 Units	Human beings develop intricate means of presenting themselves to others; of representing others as friends, enemies, or strangers; of making quick assessments of any situation based on the attribution of intentions; of sizing up the Other via symbols and other shibboleths; and of the disposition and ability to empathize and sympathize with the emotional states of others for specific purposes. In recent years, the role of culture and cultural diversity has come to play a significant role in thinking about social cognition and the evolution of sociality. It is likewise an unfortunate fact that many human beings lack many of the means, abilities, and dispositions to connect with one another easily and without extensive and explicit tutelage. Such clinical populations (e.g., autistics, schizophrenics, etc.) are of considerable interest because of their promise as a contrastive model of typicality. This course will focus on these aspects of sociality both at the level of the interpersonal and personal (cognitive and phenomenological) and the sub-personal (neuronscientific). By term's end, students in this class will develop a deep understanding of several dimensions of social cognition research and its implications for the next generation of cognitive neuroscience. Each student will articulate a research problem and develop a method for investigating it through independent and collaborative means of practicing their research, critical thinking, writing and communication skills. Offered as COGS 305 and COGS 405.
COGS 307	Cog Linguistics Theory II	3 Units	This is the second course in a two-course sequence presenting theory and practice of cognitive linguistics. Offered as COGS 307 and COGS 407. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
COGS 308	Advanced Research Workshop I	3 Units	This course is an advanced research workshop for undergraduates and MA students. The workshop involves development of research topics (theoretical or empirical), and working on them with the input of other workshop members to produce final papers. Offered as COGS 308 and COGS 408.
COGS 309	Advanced Research Workshop II	3 Units	This course is an advanced research workshop for undergraduates and MA students. The workshop involves development of research topics (theoretical or empirical), and working on them with the input of other workshop members to produce final papers. MA students in cognitive linguistics will typically take this course as the second part of a two-part sequence. Offered as COGS 309 and COGS 409.
COGS 311	Mind and Media	3 Units	An introduction to the study of mind and media, including the study of multimodal communication. This course investigates patterns of human cognition that are ancient to human beings and upon which media have converged for powerful, immersive effect. The cognitive processes studied include perception, sensation, imagination, joint attention, narrative conception, simulation, dreaming, identity construction, imaginative play, and implicit learning. Students engage in hands-on media analysis to study how basic human mental operations are used in media to achieve a variety of effects. Students will be given access to a private website of instructions, readings, and materials for the course, and will be introduced to a range of vast, rich, searchable databases of media. Students will have ample opportunity to do research inside such databases. Offered as COGS 311 and COGS 411. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
COGS 312	Second Language Acquisition I	3 Units	This course is an introduction to the growing field of second language acquisition (SLA). SLA seeks to understand the linguistic, psychological and social processes that underlie the learning and use of second language(s). The goal of research is to identify the principles and processes that govern second language learning and use. SLA is approached from three perspectives in the course:  1) as linguistic knowledge;2) as a cognitive skill; and 3) as a socially and personality-meditated process. Important factors in second language learning will be identified and discussed. These include: age-related differences, the influence of the first language, the role played by innate (universal) principles, the role of memory processes, attitudes, motivation, personality and cognitive styles, and formal versus naturalistic learning contexts. The objective of this course is to survey the principal research in second language acquisition. Students will become familiar with the major research issues through their reading of both primary and secondary sources, as well as through lectures and class discussions. Offered as COGS 312, COGS 412, LING 301 and LING 401.
COGS 314	Second Language Acquisition II: Second Language Acquisition Research and Second Language Teaching	3 Units	This course will examine various issues in second language acquisition research that are particularly relevant to foreign language teaching and learning.  Topics covered will include: the role of input (listening/reading) vs. output (speaking/writing); implicit vs. explicit learning; negative vs. positive evidence (including the role of error correction); affective factors (motivation, anxiety); individual differences; teachability hypothesis and syllabus construction, program design/evaluation, language testing, among others.  The purpose of this course is to survey the principal research in the acquisition of second language that is relevant to second language teaching in a classroom setting, and to obtain the state-of-the-art knowledge of the SLA research literature that is relevant to L2 teaching.  The focus is not necessarily on the practical application of the SLA research, although we will not exclude discussion of classroom application.  Rather, we critically examine and evaluate SLA research and come up with our own syntheses with respect to various issues.  To achieve this goal, we should ask following questions in reading and discussing the relevant literature:  1) What are the main claims that the author(s) make(s)?  2) Are the author's claims sound?  If not why?  3) What further research is needed to answer remaining questions?  Students will become familiar with the major research issues through their reading of both primary and secondary sources, as well as through lectures and class discussions.  The students are required to complete a term project that addresses the issues treated in the course.  Offered as LING 302, LING 402, COGS 314 and COGS 414. Prereq: COGS 301 or requisites not met permission.
COGS 316	Decision-Making	3 Units	This course is a topical introduction to decision-making, a major area of cognitive social science, with connections to economics, law, political science, business, policy, and related fields.  Topics include game theory and rational calculation, equilibria, kinds of choice, heuristics, the role of affect in decision, framing, bounded rationality, mechanisms of choice such as heuristics, the role of social cognition in choice, concepts of self and other, and computer modeling of choice.  The course also includes an introduction to the design of empirical behavioral research. Offered as COGS 316 and COGS 416. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
COGS 317	Cognitive Diversity	3 Units	This course surveys research from cognitive science (psychology, linguistics, neuroscience, etc.) on the ways that different people think differently.  We will consider dimensions such as sex, gender, sexual orientation, race/ethnicity, bodily differences, cultural differences, and effects of speaking different languages.  Students will choose the last two topics at the end of the semester (Different religions? Different ages? Whatever interests the class!). Offered as COGS 317 and COGS 417. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
COGS 319	Elements of Surprise	3 Units	This course will connect research into the cognitive experiences of surprise and suspense with the ways people can create those experiences for each other--cooperatively and uncooperatively--in everyday interaction and in cultural products like jokes, architecture, music, written narratives, films, and games. Topics include predictions and expectations involved in perceiving and navigating the physical world, cognitive biases, timing in conversation, language processing, attention, perspective-taking, counterfactual thinking, the psychological structure of explanations, and the psychology of "fair play." Offered as COGS 319 and COGS 419.
COGS 322	Human Learning and the Brain	3 Units	This course focuses on the question, "How does my brain learn and how can its learning best be facilitated?" Each student is required to develop a comprehensive theory about personal learning. These theories will take the form of a major paper which will be expanded and modified throughout the semester. Readings and class discussions will focus on the following topics: learning and education systems, major structures of the brain and their role in learning, neuronal wiring of the brain and how learning changes it, the emotional brain and its essential role in learning, language and the brain, the role of images in learning, memory and learning (and related pathologies, such as PTSD). Students are expected to incorporate information on these topics into their personal theory of learning. In so doing, students are expected to articulate meaningful questions, skillfully employ research and apply their own knowledge to address such questions, produce clear, precise academic prose to explicate their ideas, and provide relevant and constructive criticism during class discussions. Offered as BIOL 302 and COGS 322. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
COGS 325	Cognitive Approaches to Literature	3 Units	This course approaches literature as a window into language, in which cognition is characterized by the same imaging and imaginary properties as artistic literature.  It is an attempt to identify and analyze procedures as aesthetically interesting and generally relevant forms of human thinking, feeling, imagining, fantasizing, and conceptualizing.  The course introduces current theories of literature in relation to language and mind, and it presents and discusses practical applications in critical reading and text analysis, using examples from modern literature in the main genres.  A student may earn credit for either COGS 325 or COGS 425 but not both.  Recommended preparation: COGS 101, COGS 202. Offered as COGS 325 and COGS 425.
COGS 327	Gesture in Cognition and Communication	3 Units	Most people never notice that when they are talking, they're also gesturing. Why do we produce these gestures? What can studying them tell us about the human mind? This course surveys scientific research on gesture, exploring topics such as the role of gesture in communication, cross-cultural differences in gesture, and the relationship between gesture and signed languages. The course will focus on gestures produced with speech, but will cover symbolic and ritualized gesture in the visual arts and in dance. Offered as COGS 327, COGS 427 and MLIT 327. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
COGS 330	Cognition and Computation	3 Units	An introduction to (1) theories of the relationship between cognition and computation; (2) computational models of human cognition (e.g. models of decision-making or concept creation); and (3) computational tools for the study of human cognition. All three dimensions involve data science: theories are tested against archives of brain imaging data; models are derived from and tested against datasets of e.g., financial decisions (markets), legal rulings and findings (juries, judges, courts), legislative actions, and healthcare decisions; computational tools aggregate data and operate upon it analytically, for search, recognition, tagging, machine learning, statistical description, and hypothesis testing. Offered as COGS 330, COGS 430, DSCI 330 and DSCI 430.
COGS 331	Introduction to Applied Linguistics	3 Units	This course provides students with answers to the question, "Linguistics? What can you do with that?" We will survey the ways that linguistics has been used (i.e. applied) to solve 'real world' problems. Some of these, like computational linguistics and the teaching of language, are intimately involved in language, even though they do not necessarily concern themselves with linguistic theory. Others, such as language and the law, use linguistics as a tool to do their work. We will be concerned with understanding the various ways that linguistic inquiries have been used or neglected, and also with the implications of applied fields for linguistic theories. Offered as LING 309, LING 409, COGS 331 and COGS 431. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
COGS 335	Japanese Linguistics	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to survey the principal research in Japanese linguistics for students who have basic knowledge of Japanese and are interested in more in-depth treatment of linguistic phenomena (phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, etc.). Lectures and discussions will cover many different aspects of the Japanese language. There is a great deal of analytic studies of the Japanese language done both inside and outside Japan, which will be surveyed in this course.  Students will become familiar with the major issues through lectures and class discussions, as well as through their reading of both primary and secondary sources. Both formal and functional approaches to the analysis of Japanese will be examined, and the acquisition of these structures will also be discussed. The course will also be useful for the improvement of students' Japanese language proficiency.  Recommended preparation: JAPN 101 and JAPN 102, or equivalent competence in Japanese. Offered as COGS 335, COGS 435, JAPN 435, LING 335 and LING 435. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
COGS 348	Buddhism and Cognitive Science	3 Units	In 1987, the Dalai Lama initiated a yearly event--Mind and Life Dialogues--to address "critical issues of modern life at the intersection of scientific and contemplative understanding". Dialogue topics included issues related to Buddhist thought and practice, and cognitive science. Others with an interest in the intersection of Buddhism and cognitive science, such as Robert Wright in Why Buddhism is True: The Science and Philosophy of Meditation and Enlightenment (2017), argue that non-supernatural aspects of Buddhism, such as the benefits of mindfulness meditation and the nature of the (non-)self, are affirmed by cognitive science and evolutionary psychology. The notion that at least some aspects of Buddhism are "true" in relation to contemporary cognitive scientific views of mind and brain has attracted considerable attention from both Buddhist practitioners and cognitive scientists. This seminar explores Buddhist and cognitive science perspectives on issues such as embodied cognition, consciousness, mind, self and personal identity, theory of mind, morality, representation, and language. We start with a general overview of Buddhist philosophy, and then turn to specific readings on Buddhist concepts in relation to similar concepts found in the cognitive science literature. For instance, we will explore the Buddhist concept of no permanent self or soul (an-tman). This idea resonates with Daniel Dennett's notion of the "narrative self" and the cognitive neuroscience view that there is no neurological center of self or experience. Although the specific concepts covered will vary in each iteration of this course, readings will always be drawn from both Buddhist primary and secondary readings, and from the cognitive science literature. Offered as COGS 348, COGS 448, RLGN 348 and RLGN 448. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Completion of one COGS or RLGN course or Requisites Not Met permission.
COGS 378	Computational Neuroscience	3 Units	Computer simulations and mathematical analysis of neurons and neural circuits, and the computational properties of nervous systems.  Students are taught a range of models for neurons and neural circuits, and are asked to implement and explore the computational and dynamic properties of these models.  The course introduces students to dynamical systems theory for the analysis of neurons and neural learning, models of brain systems, and their relationship to artificial and neural networks.  Term project required.  Students enrolled in MATH 478 will make arrangements with the instructor to attend additional lectures and complete additional assignments addressing mathematical topics related to the course.   Recommended preparation: MATH 223 and MATH 224 or BIOL 300 and BIOL 306. Offered as BIOL 378, COGS 378, MATH 378, BIOL 478, CSDS 478, EBME 478, ECSE 478, MATH 478 and NEUR 478.
COGS 390	Introduction to General Semiotics	3 Units	Semiotics, the study of meaning and signs conveying meaning, is a central part of cognitive semiotics, or 'high level' cognitive semantics.  This discipline is typically taught in departments of linguistics, cognitive science, philosophy, or cultural studies.  The domain of semiotics is in fact widely intersecting with other disciplines (general linguistics, philosophy, neuroscience, anthropology, music, literature, architecture, and the arts).  Sign theory, text theory, studies of narrative structure, enunciation, natural logic, rhetoric and poetics, speech act forms, are important components in this field.
COGS 391	Introduction to Text Semiotics	3 Units	Introduction to Text Semiotics addresses both students of Literature and students in Cognitive Science.  Most of the authors included in the reading list extend their linguistic approach towards fields that intersect literature, psychology, philosophy, aesthetics, and anthropology.  The scholarly traditions of text analysis and structural theory of meaning, including authors from classical formalism, structuralism, structural semiotics, and new criticism will be connected to cognitive theories of meaning construction in test, discourse, and cultural expressions in general.  The focus of this course, taught as a seminar, is on empirical studies, specific text analyses, discourse analyses, speech act analyses, and other studies of speech, writing, and uses of language in cultural contexts.  This course thus introduces to a study of literature and cultural expressions based on cognitive science and modern semiotics--the new view that has be coined Cognitive Semiotics. Offered as COGS 391 and WLIT 391.
COGS 397	SAGES Capstone in Cognitive Science	3 Units	Supervised original research on a topic in cognitive science, culminating in a public presentation.  The research may be in the form of an independent research project, a literature review, or some other form approved by the department. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
COGS 399	Independent Studies in Cognitive Science	1 - 3 Units	This course is for students with special interests and commitments that are not fully addressed in regular courses, and who wish to work independently.
COGS 401	Special Topics in Cognitive Science	3 Units	Special Topics in Cognitive Science.  Topics vary.  Permission of department is required. Offered as COGS 301 and COGS 401.
COGS 405	Social Cognition and the Brain	3 Units	Human beings develop intricate means of presenting themselves to others; of representing others as friends, enemies, or strangers; of making quick assessments of any situation based on the attribution of intentions; of sizing up the Other via symbols and other shibboleths; and of the disposition and ability to empathize and sympathize with the emotional states of others for specific purposes. In recent years, the role of culture and cultural diversity has come to play a significant role in thinking about social cognition and the evolution of sociality. It is likewise an unfortunate fact that many human beings lack many of the means, abilities, and dispositions to connect with one another easily and without extensive and explicit tutelage. Such clinical populations (e.g., autistics, schizophrenics, etc.) are of considerable interest because of their promise as a contrastive model of typicality. This course will focus on these aspects of sociality both at the level of the interpersonal and personal (cognitive and phenomenological) and the sub-personal (neuronscientific). By term's end, students in this class will develop a deep understanding of several dimensions of social cognition research and its implications for the next generation of cognitive neuroscience. Each student will articulate a research problem and develop a method for investigating it through independent and collaborative means of practicing their research, critical thinking, writing and communication skills. Offered as COGS 305 and COGS 405.
COGS 406	Theory of Cognitive Linguistics I	3 Units	This is the first course in a two-course sequence presenting theory and practice of cognitive linguistics. Offered as COGS 206 and COGS 406.
COGS 407	Cog Linguistics Theory II	3 Units	This is the second course in a two-course sequence presenting theory and practice of cognitive linguistics. Offered as COGS 307 and COGS 407. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: COGS 406 or consent of instructor.
COGS 408	Advanced Research Workshop I	3 Units	This course is an advanced research workshop for undergraduates and MA students. The workshop involves development of research topics (theoretical or empirical), and working on them with the input of other workshop members to produce final papers. Offered as COGS 308 and COGS 408.
COGS 409	Advanced Research Workshop II	3 Units	This course is an advanced research workshop for undergraduates and MA students. The workshop involves development of research topics (theoretical or empirical), and working on them with the input of other workshop members to produce final papers. MA students in cognitive linguistics will typically take this course as the second part of a two-part sequence. Offered as COGS 309 and COGS 409.
COGS 411	Mind and Media	3 Units	An introduction to the study of mind and media, including the study of multimodal communication. This course investigates patterns of human cognition that are ancient to human beings and upon which media have converged for powerful, immersive effect. The cognitive processes studied include perception, sensation, imagination, joint attention, narrative conception, simulation, dreaming, identity construction, imaginative play, and implicit learning. Students engage in hands-on media analysis to study how basic human mental operations are used in media to achieve a variety of effects. Students will be given access to a private website of instructions, readings, and materials for the course, and will be introduced to a range of vast, rich, searchable databases of media. Students will have ample opportunity to do research inside such databases. Offered as COGS 311 and COGS 411. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
COGS 412	Second Language Acquisition I	3 Units	This course is an introduction to the growing field of second language acquisition (SLA). SLA seeks to understand the linguistic, psychological and social processes that underlie the learning and use of second language(s). The goal of research is to identify the principles and processes that govern second language learning and use. SLA is approached from three perspectives in the course:  1) as linguistic knowledge;2) as a cognitive skill; and 3) as a socially and personality-meditated process. Important factors in second language learning will be identified and discussed. These include: age-related differences, the influence of the first language, the role played by innate (universal) principles, the role of memory processes, attitudes, motivation, personality and cognitive styles, and formal versus naturalistic learning contexts. The objective of this course is to survey the principal research in second language acquisition. Students will become familiar with the major research issues through their reading of both primary and secondary sources, as well as through lectures and class discussions. Offered as COGS 312, COGS 412, LING 301 and LING 401.
COGS 414	Second Language Acquisition II: Second Language Acquisition Research and Second Language Teaching	3 Units	This course will examine various issues in second language acquisition research that are particularly relevant to foreign language teaching and learning.  Topics covered will include: the role of input (listening/reading) vs. output (speaking/writing); implicit vs. explicit learning; negative vs. positive evidence (including the role of error correction); affective factors (motivation, anxiety); individual differences; teachability hypothesis and syllabus construction, program design/evaluation, language testing, among others.  The purpose of this course is to survey the principal research in the acquisition of second language that is relevant to second language teaching in a classroom setting, and to obtain the state-of-the-art knowledge of the SLA research literature that is relevant to L2 teaching.  The focus is not necessarily on the practical application of the SLA research, although we will not exclude discussion of classroom application.  Rather, we critically examine and evaluate SLA research and come up with our own syntheses with respect to various issues.  To achieve this goal, we should ask following questions in reading and discussing the relevant literature:  1) What are the main claims that the author(s) make(s)?  2) Are the author's claims sound?  If not why?  3) What further research is needed to answer remaining questions?  Students will become familiar with the major research issues through their reading of both primary and secondary sources, as well as through lectures and class discussions.  The students are required to complete a term project that addresses the issues treated in the course.  Offered as LING 302, LING 402, COGS 314 and COGS 414. Prereq: COGS 401 or requisites not met permission.
COGS 416	Decision-Making	3 Units	This course is a topical introduction to decision-making, a major area of cognitive social science, with connections to economics, law, political science, business, policy, and related fields.  Topics include game theory and rational calculation, equilibria, kinds of choice, heuristics, the role of affect in decision, framing, bounded rationality, mechanisms of choice such as heuristics, the role of social cognition in choice, concepts of self and other, and computer modeling of choice.  The course also includes an introduction to the design of empirical behavioral research. Offered as COGS 316 and COGS 416. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
COGS 417	Cognitive Diversity	3 Units	This course surveys research from cognitive science (psychology, linguistics, neuroscience, etc.) on the ways that different people think differently.  We will consider dimensions such as sex, gender, sexual orientation, race/ethnicity, bodily differences, cultural differences, and effects of speaking different languages.  Students will choose the last two topics at the end of the semester (Different religions? Different ages? Whatever interests the class!). Offered as COGS 317 and COGS 417. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
COGS 419	Elements of Surprise	3 Units	This course will connect research into the cognitive experiences of surprise and suspense with the ways people can create those experiences for each other--cooperatively and uncooperatively--in everyday interaction and in cultural products like jokes, architecture, music, written narratives, films, and games. Topics include predictions and expectations involved in perceiving and navigating the physical world, cognitive biases, timing in conversation, language processing, attention, perspective-taking, counterfactual thinking, the psychological structure of explanations, and the psychology of "fair play." Offered as COGS 319 and COGS 419.
COGS 425	Cognitive Approaches to Literature	3 Units	This course approaches literature as a window into language, in which cognition is characterized by the same imaging and imaginary properties as artistic literature.  It is an attempt to identify and analyze procedures as aesthetically interesting and generally relevant forms of human thinking, feeling, imagining, fantasizing, and conceptualizing.  The course introduces current theories of literature in relation to language and mind, and it presents and discusses practical applications in critical reading and text analysis, using examples from modern literature in the main genres.  A student may earn credit for either COGS 325 or COGS 425 but not both.  Recommended preparation: COGS 101, COGS 202. Offered as COGS 325 and COGS 425.
COGS 427	Gesture in Cognition and Communication	3 Units	Most people never notice that when they are talking, they're also gesturing. Why do we produce these gestures? What can studying them tell us about the human mind? This course surveys scientific research on gesture, exploring topics such as the role of gesture in communication, cross-cultural differences in gesture, and the relationship between gesture and signed languages. The course will focus on gestures produced with speech, but will cover symbolic and ritualized gesture in the visual arts and in dance. Offered as COGS 327, COGS 427 and MLIT 327. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
COGS 430	Cognition and Computation	3 Units	An introduction to (1) theories of the relationship between cognition and computation; (2) computational models of human cognition (e.g. models of decision-making or concept creation); and (3) computational tools for the study of human cognition. All three dimensions involve data science: theories are tested against archives of brain imaging data; models are derived from and tested against datasets of e.g., financial decisions (markets), legal rulings and findings (juries, judges, courts), legislative actions, and healthcare decisions; computational tools aggregate data and operate upon it analytically, for search, recognition, tagging, machine learning, statistical description, and hypothesis testing. Offered as COGS 330, COGS 430, DSCI 330 and DSCI 430.
COGS 431	Introduction to Applied Linguistics	3 Units	This course provides students with answers to the question, "Linguistics? What can you do with that?" We will survey the ways that linguistics has been used (i.e. applied) to solve 'real world' problems. Some of these, like computational linguistics and the teaching of language, are intimately involved in language, even though they do not necessarily concern themselves with linguistic theory. Others, such as language and the law, use linguistics as a tool to do their work. We will be concerned with understanding the various ways that linguistic inquiries have been used or neglected, and also with the implications of applied fields for linguistic theories. Offered as LING 309, LING 409, COGS 331 and COGS 431. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
COGS 435	Japanese Linguistics	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to survey the principal research in Japanese linguistics for students who have basic knowledge of Japanese and are interested in more in-depth treatment of linguistic phenomena (phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, etc.). Lectures and discussions will cover many different aspects of the Japanese language. There is a great deal of analytic studies of the Japanese language done both inside and outside Japan, which will be surveyed in this course.  Students will become familiar with the major issues through lectures and class discussions, as well as through their reading of both primary and secondary sources. Both formal and functional approaches to the analysis of Japanese will be examined, and the acquisition of these structures will also be discussed. The course will also be useful for the improvement of students' Japanese language proficiency.  Recommended preparation: JAPN 101 and JAPN 102, or equivalent competence in Japanese. Offered as COGS 335, COGS 435, JAPN 435, LING 335 and LING 435. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
COGS 448	Buddhism and Cognitive Science	3 Units	In 1987, the Dalai Lama initiated a yearly event--Mind and Life Dialogues--to address "critical issues of modern life at the intersection of scientific and contemplative understanding". Dialogue topics included issues related to Buddhist thought and practice, and cognitive science. Others with an interest in the intersection of Buddhism and cognitive science, such as Robert Wright in Why Buddhism is True: The Science and Philosophy of Meditation and Enlightenment (2017), argue that non-supernatural aspects of Buddhism, such as the benefits of mindfulness meditation and the nature of the (non-)self, are affirmed by cognitive science and evolutionary psychology. The notion that at least some aspects of Buddhism are "true" in relation to contemporary cognitive scientific views of mind and brain has attracted considerable attention from both Buddhist practitioners and cognitive scientists. This seminar explores Buddhist and cognitive science perspectives on issues such as embodied cognition, consciousness, mind, self and personal identity, theory of mind, morality, representation, and language. We start with a general overview of Buddhist philosophy, and then turn to specific readings on Buddhist concepts in relation to similar concepts found in the cognitive science literature. For instance, we will explore the Buddhist concept of no permanent self or soul (an-tman). This idea resonates with Daniel Dennett's notion of the "narrative self" and the cognitive neuroscience view that there is no neurological center of self or experience. Although the specific concepts covered will vary in each iteration of this course, readings will always be drawn from both Buddhist primary and secondary readings, and from the cognitive science literature. Offered as COGS 348, COGS 448, RLGN 348 and RLGN 448. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Completion of one COGS or RLGN course or Requisites Not Met permission.
COGS 499	Independent Studies	1 - 3 Units	This course is a face-to-face seminar between students and instructor, aiming at letting and helping the students independently develop original research on well-defined topics in the field of cognitive linguistics.  Themes can vary within the wide area of cognition and culture.
COGS 651	Thesis M.A.	1 - 6 Units	Conduct independent research and writing in Cognitive Linguistics under the guidance of a faculty adviser from Cognitive Science.  The precise requirements of the course are to be determined by the faculty advisor. Prereq: COGS 406 and COGS 407 and COGS 408. Coreq: COGS 409.
COSI 101	Introduction to Health Communication	3 Units	An introductory examination of the influences associated with the functions of human life, communication processes, and research related to health and the health care industry from interpersonal, cultural, and organizational communication perspectives. The course will include a review of the history and development of health communication and the understanding and application of communication theories.
COSI 109	Introduction to Communication Disorders	3 Units	Forty-two million Americans have some type of communication disorder.  How does a person with a communication disorder cope with the challenges of daily living?  This course will examine the characteristics of communication disorders via first hand and fictionalized accounts in books, films, and simulated communication disorders experiences.  Topics will include disorders of speech, language, and hearing in children and adults.  Effects of communication disorders on families.
COSI 200	Interpersonal Communication	3 Units	Communication is a primary means of initiating, maintaining, and dissolving relationships.  Managing interpersonal relationships is a human concern across several contexts.  Interpersonal communication is a highly interactive course whereby participants investigate the foundations, processes, and issues associated with communication in relationships.  The student will become sensitized to theories and processes via traditional lectures and textbook readings.  The student is also expected to participate in group discussions.  The result is a continuous dialogue with others about communication processes, and outcomes.  The goal of this course is to provide a forum for both investigation and increased competence.
COSI 211	Phonetics and Phonology	3 Units	Theoretical and applied study of the speech sounds of language. The use of the international phonetic alphabet as a tool for characterizing normal and deviant sound patterns. The linguistic structure and function of speech sound systems of both the adult and developing child.
COSI 220	Introduction to American Sign Language I	3 Units	This course offers basic vocabulary training and conversational interaction skills in American Sign Language. Syntactic and semantic aspects of American Sign Language will be addressed.
COSI 221	Introduction to American Sign Language II	3 Units	This course incorporates non-verbal communication techniques, intermediate vocabulary, grammatical rules and conversational skills. Deaf culture and history is also an important part of the course. Students will focus on general aspects of conversational signs and nonverbal aspects of American Sign Language. Using Signing Naturally Units 7-12 as a guide; students will also incorporate the use of expressive and receptive skills in every class. The full immersion model will be applied in each class. Instruction and student participation will only be in ASL. Prereq: COSI 220.
COSI 260	Multicultural Aspects of Human Communication	3 Units	Introduces intercultural/interracial communication by discussing specific communication principles and by putting theory into practice by exploring differences in perception, and verbal and nonverbal communication messages. Course emphasizes relationship between communication, race, culture; nature of race and culture; and how they influence the communication process. Various theories and approaches to study of intercultural/interracial communication will be discussed, along with significant concepts, processes and considerations. Practical outcomes of intercultural/interracial encounters also will be discussed. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
COSI 261	Multicultural Aspects of Communication Disorders	3 Units	Introduces intercultural/interracial communication principles and includes the exploration of differences in perceptions for communication messages.  Provides students with a basic understanding of the differences associated with assessment, intervention, and identification of communication disorders for culturally and linguistically diverse populations. Students will critically analyze best practice approaches for communication disorders for diverse populations including differences in race, ethnicity/culture, sexual orientation, gender identity, and socio-economic status. Practical outcomes that can encourage more positive intercultural/interracial encounters will be discussed. Offered as COSI 261 and COSI 461. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
COSI 280	Organizational Communication	3 Units	This course includes a review of the development of organizational communication theories and how application of theories enhances our understanding of various types of organizations. COSI 280 addresses the communication challenges faced by contemporary organizational leaders and members. Knowledge of the theories and development of analytical skills should improve students' chances for successful interactions in diverse organizational situations and cultures.
COSI 305	Neuroscience of Communication and Communication Disorders	3 Units	The course focus is neuroanatomy and neurophysiology related to motor control and cognition, particularly aspects of cognition involved in language functions. Topics to be addressed include: principles of neurophysiology and neurochemistry; functional neuroanatomy of the central and peripheral nervous systems; neurological and neuropsychological assessment of communication; neurodiagnostic methods.  In part, the course material will be presented in a problem-based learning format.  That is, normal aspects of human neuroscience will be discussed in the context of neurological disorders affecting communication. COSI 305 is an elective for undergraduate students. COSI 405 is an introduction to COSI 557 and COSI 561, and a required course for graduate students. Offered as COSI 305 and COSI 405.
COSI 313	Language Development	3 Units	Language acquisition theory and stages of development of syntax, semantics, pragmatics, and phonology in children. Contributions of biological, social, cognitive and environmental factors to process of language development. Information on language variation in multicultural populations.  Open to majors and non-majors.  Recommended prerequisite: Child Psychology. Offered as COSI 313 and COSI 413.
COSI 321	Speech and Hearing Science	3 Units	A strong foundation in normal aspects of oral communication will prepare students for advanced study in the assessment and management of disorders of speech and hearing perception. This course will focus on speech and hearing acoustics, sound measurement, the nature of hearing, speech production, and speech and hearing perception. Topics to be covered include speech and hearing acoustics, auditory anatomy and physiology, psychoacoustics, and speech and hearing perception.  Offered as COSI 321 and COSI 421. Prereq: COSI 325.
COSI 325	Anatomy and Physiology of Speech and Hearing Mechanism	3 Units	The course will focus on normal anatomy and physiology of the body systems involved in the processes of speech, language, hearing, and swallowing including the following: the auditory, respiratory, phonatory, articulatory, resonatory, and nervous systems. In part, the course material will be presented in a problem-based learning format. That is, normal aspects of human anatomy and physiology will be discussed in the context of the disorders that affect the processes of human communication and swallowing.
COSI 332	Persuasion	3 Units	This survey course explores the history, theories, and dynamics of persuasion.  There is an extensive focus on theoretical models of attitude change.  Persuasion also plays a strong role in everyday aspects of our culture.  Along these lines, we will investigate persuasion activities in everyday life from compliance gaining to media campaigns.  Learning is conveyed through lecture, activities, and observation of the student's everyday life.  At the end of the semester, the astute student will be literate in a variety of persuasion strategies and dynamics.
COSI 340	Advanced Health Communication	3 Units	Various communication processes assume a central role in the acquisition and enactment of health care. This course examines communication activity across a broad range of health care contexts. Attention will be given to provider-client communication, communication, and ethical concerns, persuasive health promotion efforts, media impact on health, and basics in health communication methodology and research. Students will consider source, message, and receiver aspects of health communication as well as cultural and illness-specific issues.  Offered as COSI 340 and COSI 440. Prereq: COSI 101.
COSI 345	Communication and Aging	3 Units	The normal and abnormal psychobiological changes that occur during aging and their effects on communication are addressed, as are communicative interaction styles, disordered communication, and rehabilitation practices. Graduate students are given an opportunity to incorporate information from their own disciplines in a special project, where appropriate. Offered as COSI 345 and COSI 445. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
COSI 352	Introduction to Clinical Practice in Speech-Language Pathology	3 Units	Clinical assessment and teaching procedures as well as the role of research/theory in clinical practice.  Procedures to observe, measure, analyze communication skills.  Practical application through case studies.  Students complete 25 hours of observation of speech/language assessment and intervention. Prereq: COSI 211 or COSI 313.
COSI 355	Introduction to Linguistics	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to linguistics, with application to clinical assessment, diagnosis and therapy of language disorders.  In particular, the course provides an introduction to theory and methods of linguistics:  universal properties of human language; phonetic, phonological, morphological, syntactic, and semantic structures and analysis; nature and form of grammar.
COSI 357	Acquired Neurogenic Communication Disorders	3 Units	This course is designed to provide knowledge about the theoretical foundations, etiologies, and characterizations of acquired language-based and cognitive-communication disorders in adults.  The organization of the course is designed so that we will discuss communication disorders typically associated with left hemisphere lesions (e.g., aphasia), right hemisphere lesions (e.g., RHD), frontal lobe lesions (e.g., traumatic brain injury) and mesial temporal lesions (e.g., dementia).  This course is intended to provide students with a framework for considering communication disorders of diverse medical etiologies rather than specific impairment types.  The course is meant to provide information that can be used as a foundation for a clinically applied course in acquired language disorders.  The course will focus on critical thinking, professional presentation (both oral and written), and critical consumption of research. Instructor consent for COSI 457 only. Offered as COSI 357 and COSI 457. Prereq: COSI 109.
COSI 370	Introduction to Audiology	3 Units	Fifteen percent of the US population has some degree of hearing loss. Yet, many people do not seek audiological intervention and only one in five people who could benefit from a hearing aid wear one. In this class, students will learn about the field of audiology including assessment and diagnostics measures and interventions used by audiologists. Students will evaluate audiometers and test environments for audiology, describe pure-tone audiometry, and conduct simulated hearing tests. Students will also be introduced to auditory pathologies and related disorders. Students will also be introduced to assessments in infants and children, audiological screening and audiological management. Offered as COSI 370 and COSI 470. Prereq: COSI 321 and COSI 325.
COSI 390	Independent Study	1 - 6 Units	Individual study, under the guidance of a faculty member, involving specific programs of reading, research and special projects.
COSI 395	Capstone and Honors Program	3 Units	Supervision in carrying out an independent research study in the student's area of interest.  Offered every semester.  Any student majoring in communication sciences (COSI) may take this course to fulfill the capstone requirement; qualified students may take this course to fulfill the capstone requirement AND to graduate with honors.  During their Junior year, qualified COSI majors are encouraged to apply to the department's Honors Program, which leads to a B.A. with Honors.  The program's purpose is to provide students with an intensive, supervised research experience in areas of their choice.  The program consists of PSCL 375 and COSI 395 and begins in the junior year, when students receive instruction in research design and methodology.  This provides the foundation for students to work under close supervision with a department faculty member during the senior year.  At the end of the semester, the research project is written in scholarly form, and presented for consideration of graduation with Honors.  Junior majors with a minimum 3.25 average in COSI major courses are a 3.0 overall GPA may apply.  The Honors Program requires a great deal of work, and only students with a serious interest in behavioral sciences should apply. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: (STAT 201 or PSCL 282) and PSCL 375.
COSI 405	Neuroscience of Communication and Communication Disorders	3 Units	The course focus is neuroanatomy and neurophysiology related to motor control and cognition, particularly aspects of cognition involved in language functions. Topics to be addressed include: principles of neurophysiology and neurochemistry; functional neuroanatomy of the central and peripheral nervous systems; neurological and neuropsychological assessment of communication; neurodiagnostic methods.  In part, the course material will be presented in a problem-based learning format.  That is, normal aspects of human neuroscience will be discussed in the context of neurological disorders affecting communication. COSI 305 is an elective for undergraduate students. COSI 405 is an introduction to COSI 557 and COSI 561, and a required course for graduate students. Offered as COSI 305 and COSI 405.
COSI 406	Academic English Proficiency: Speech Production	3 Units	In this module the provisional student will work in small groups with the instructor/s to develop new speech habits and patterns to improve production of spoken English for academic and professional success. Following successful completion of the course the student will demonstrate an improvement of 50% from baseline speech production scores, and demonstrate the ability to practice sound production independently to assure continued refinement over time.  The course includes 90 minutes of small group instructions per week and a minimum of 50-60 minutes of daily practice. The student will be required to submit a minimum of 2 practice recordings per week for feedback.  Students who successfully complete this course will demonstrate 50% improvement from baseline speech production scores.
COSI 413	Language Development	3 Units	Language acquisition theory and stages of development of syntax, semantics, pragmatics, and phonology in children. Contributions of biological, social, cognitive and environmental factors to process of language development. Information on language variation in multicultural populations.  Open to majors and non-majors.  Recommended prerequisite: Child Psychology. Offered as COSI 313 and COSI 413.
COSI 421	Speech and Hearing Science	3 Units	A strong foundation in normal aspects of oral communication will prepare students for advanced study in the assessment and management of disorders of speech and hearing perception. This course will focus on speech and hearing acoustics, sound measurement, the nature of hearing, speech production, and speech and hearing perception. Topics to be covered include speech and hearing acoustics, auditory anatomy and physiology, psychoacoustics, and speech and hearing perception.  Offered as COSI 321 and COSI 421.
COSI 431	Medical Aspects of Developmental Disabilities: Theory and Practice	2 Units	The practicum provides structured training activities to help the student become proficient in birth to three assessment and intervention and infant and toddler development.  This intensive training experience will provide skills that students need when working in early intervention settings. Guided observation of children and developmental domains, parent-child interaction, and family based assessment will be included.
COSI 440	Advanced Health Communication	3 Units	Various communication processes assume a central role in the acquisition and enactment of health care. This course examines communication activity across a broad range of health care contexts. Attention will be given to provider-client communication, communication, and ethical concerns, persuasive health promotion efforts, media impact on health, and basics in health communication methodology and research. Students will consider source, message, and receiver aspects of health communication as well as cultural and illness-specific issues.  Offered as COSI 340 and COSI 440.
COSI 443	Meta-Analysis of Communication Disorders Research Workshop	1 Unit	This course will guide students through the application of meta-analysis to the systematic literature review completed in COSI 444L to address a clinical question and will serve as the analysis and results section of the paper which will be used in partial fulfillment of the Plan B Master's Project requirements. Prereq: COSI 444 and COSI 444L.
COSI 444	Evidence Based Practice in Communication Disorders	2 Units	Evidence-based practice is the conscientious, explicit and judicious use of current best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual clients. Having its origins in the fields of medicine and clinical epidemiology, EBP is now an essential component to clinical practice in speech-language pathology. The goal of COSI 444 is to instill in you a career-long desire to seek out high-quality relevant evidence pertinent to the clinical questions that affect your practice. To do this, you must first know how to find the evidence and evaluate the quality of evidence available. This course is intended to demystify the research process so that you can become critical consumers of the research literature in our field.
COSI 444L	Evidence Based Practice in Communication Disorders Lab	1 Unit	This course will guide students through the application of meta-analysis to the systematic literature review completed in COSI 444L to address a clinical question and will serve as the analysis and results section of the paper which will be used in partial fulfillment of the Plan B Masters Project requirements. Prereq: COSI 444.
COSI 445	Communication and Aging	3 Units	The normal and abnormal psychobiological changes that occur during aging and their effects on communication are addressed, as are communicative interaction styles, disordered communication, and rehabilitation practices. Graduate students are given an opportunity to incorporate information from their own disciplines in a special project, where appropriate. Offered as COSI 345 and COSI 445. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
COSI 452A	Graduate Clinical Practicum I: Case Management	1 Unit	Addresses professional issues in speech-language pathology including case management, clinical effectiveness, counseling and working with families from diverse backgrounds.  Four to ten hours of clinic contact per week at the Cleveland Hearing and Speech Center.  (Maximum of 2 credits.) Recommended preparation: COSI 352 and COSI 413.
COSI 452B	Graduate Clinical Practicum II: Professional Issues	1 Unit	Addresses professional issues in speech-language pathology including case management, managed health care, ethics and interviewing.  Four to ten hours of clinic contact per week at the Cleveland Hearing and Speech Center.  (Maximum of 2 credits.) Recommended preparation: COSI 352, COSI 413, COSI 452A, and COSI 453.
COSI 452C	Graduate Clinical Practicum III: Special Populations	1 Unit	Addresses professional issues in speech-language pathology including case management, special clinical populations, collaborating with other professionals, teaming, leadership, and use of technology.  Fifteen to thirty hours of clinic contact per week at area skilled nursing facilities, hospitals, rehab centers, early intervention centers, centers for developmentally disabled, private practices, etc.  (Maximum of 2 credits.) Recommended preparation: COSI 352, COSI 452A, COSI 452B, COSI 453, and COSI 456.
COSI 452E	Graduate Clinical Practicum V	Medical Speech Pathology	1 Unit	Addresses professional issues in speech-language pathology including case management, special clinical populations, collaborating with other professionals, documentation, managed health care, and use of technology.  Fifteen to thirty hours of clinic contact per week at area skilled nursing facilities, hospitals.  (Maximum of 2 credits.) Recommended preparation: COSI 352, COSI 452A, COSI 452B, COSI 452C, COSI 453, and COSI 456.
COSI 452S	Graduate Clinical Practicum III: Special Populations	1 Unit	Addresses professional issues in speech-language pathology including case management, special clinical populations, collaborating with other professionals, teaming, leadership and use of technology. This course confers full time student status in the summer term in recognition of an average of 25 hours of clinic contact per week at area skilled nursing facilities, hospitals, rehab centers, early intervention centers, centers for developmentally disabled, private practices etc. Prereq: COSI 452A and COSI 452B.
COSI 453	Articulation and Phonology Disorders	3 Units	Overview of normal speech sound development and characterization of children with speech sound disorders. Distinctions between phonology and articulation are drawn. Theoretical as well as assessment and treatment issues are addressed.
COSI 455	Fluency Disorders	3 Units	Stuttering and related disorders of rhythm and prosody in terms of the symptomatology, etiology, measurement, and treatment of nonfluent speaking behavior.
COSI 456	Child Language Disorders	3 Units	Nature and characteristics of language disorders in children. Theoretical and clinical issues related to effective intervention with children and their families.  Assessment and treatment of disorders of syntax, semantics and pragmatics.  Strategies for intervention with children from special populations and multicultural populations.
COSI 457	Acquired Neurogenic Communication Disorders	3 Units	This course is designed to provide knowledge about the theoretical foundations, etiologies, and characterizations of acquired language-based and cognitive-communication disorders in adults.  The organization of the course is designed so that we will discuss communication disorders typically associated with left hemisphere lesions (e.g., aphasia), right hemisphere lesions (e.g., RHD), frontal lobe lesions (e.g., traumatic brain injury) and mesial temporal lesions (e.g., dementia).  This course is intended to provide students with a framework for considering communication disorders of diverse medical etiologies rather than specific impairment types.  The course is meant to provide information that can be used as a foundation for a clinically applied course in acquired language disorders.  The course will focus on critical thinking, professional presentation (both oral and written), and critical consumption of research. Instructor consent for COSI 457 only. Offered as COSI 357 and COSI 457.
COSI 461	Multicultural Aspects of Communication Disorders	3 Units	Introduces intercultural/interracial communication principles and includes the exploration of differences in perceptions for communication messages.  Provides students with a basic understanding of the differences associated with assessment, intervention, and identification of communication disorders for culturally and linguistically diverse populations. Students will critically analyze best practice approaches for communication disorders for diverse populations including differences in race, ethnicity/culture, sexual orientation, gender identity, and socio-economic status. Practical outcomes that can encourage more positive intercultural/interracial encounters will be discussed. Offered as COSI 261 and COSI 461. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
COSI 470	Introduction to Audiology	3 Units	Fifteen percent of the US population has some degree of hearing loss. Yet, many people do not seek audiological intervention and only one in five people who could benefit from a hearing aid wear one. In this class, students will learn about the field of audiology including assessment and diagnostics measures and interventions used by audiologists. Students will evaluate audiometers and test environments for audiology, describe pure-tone audiometry, and conduct simulated hearing tests. Students will also be introduced to auditory pathologies and related disorders. Students will also be introduced to assessments in infants and children, audiological screening and audiological management. Offered as COSI 370 and COSI 470. Prereq: COSI 325.
COSI 556	Language Disorders 2: Language and Literacy	3 Units	This course focuses on research-based theories of reading, cognition, language, and learning disorders in the school-age and adolescent student. Language development of the older child during the school age and adolescent years will be reviewed. Topics include the development of metalinguistic skills, the expanding lexicon, narration and discourse, and advances in syntax and morphology. The relationship of spoken language to literacy will be discussed. The course will examine common language, literacy and learning disabilities during the school age years. The student will explore interventions for word skills, reading decoding and comprehension, oral expression, vocabulary, and written languages as they apply to the Speech Language Pathologist. Assessment and intervention strategies for the school-age child and adolescent with a language/learning disorder are included. The class format includes lectures, discussions of case studies, and experiential learning through the observation of therapy with the school age/adolescent student. Prereq: COSI 456.
COSI 557	Acquired Adult Language Disorders	3 Units	A model relating communication impairment to activities of daily living and quality of life will serve as the study of acquired neurogenic communication disorders in adults.  The focus will be on dementia, aphasia, and the communication disorders associated with traumatic brain injury and right hemisphere stroke.  Knowledge about the biological basis of neurogenic communication disorders will be applied in discussion on assessment and intervention for these disorders. Prereq: COSI 405 or equivalent.
COSI 560	Medical Aspects of Speech Pathology I: Voice Disorders	3 Units	Aspects of normal and abnormal voice production, evaluation and management of various voice and resonance disorders. Prereq: COSI 405 and COSI 562.
COSI 561	Med Aspects of Speech Path II: Neuromotor and Craniofacial Anomalies	4 Units	Speech disorders resulting from conditions acting on motor speech production including dysarthria and apraxia will be discussed. The speech production system, diseases and acquired and congenital neuropathological conditions that affect motor process and resulting speech disorders of phonation, articulation, resonance and prosody will be reviewed. Also covered will be the speech, language and hearing disorders stemming from craniofacial anomalies; cleft lip and palate. Principles and methods of assessment and treatment within an interdisciplinary rehabilitation framework will be reviewed for both types of disorders. Prereq: COSI 321 or COSI 421 and COSI 405 or equivalent.
COSI 562	Medical Aspects of Speech Pathology III: Dysphagia	3 Units	Course relates to medical speech-language pathology and includes analysis of clinical problems involving dysphagia in high risk populations.  Course focus is on the anatomy and physiology of the normal swallow, dysphagia, early identification and prevention, the clinical swallow assessment, instrumental assessment and intervention in pediatric and adult populations.
COSI 563	Medical Aspects of Speech Pathology IV: Pediatric Dysphagia	3 Units	This course focuses on swallowing and dysphagia in infants and children. Topics include typical development of anatomy and physiology of pediatric swallowing, evaluation of pediatric swallowing function, treatment modalities, and clinical populations. Prereq: COSI 562.
COSI 580	Aural Rehabilitation	3 Units	The effects of hearing impairment, especially related to speech perception and language processing. Remediation and intervention strategies for children and adults who are hard-of-hearing, including speech reading, auditory training, the use of hearing aids and other assistive listening devices.
COSI 600	Special Problems and Topics	1 - 3 Units	Topics and instructors by arrangement of the department chair.
COSI 601	Directed Study and Research	1 - 6 Units	Individual study and research under the direction of a faculty member.
COSI 651	Thesis M.A.	1 - 6 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
COSI 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
COMP 200	Directed Clinical Experience	.5 - 6 Units	Directed clinical experience under faculty supervision and with special permission of the Associate Dean for Education.
COMP 300	Directed Clinical Studies	.5 - 8 Units	Independent study during the period prior to daily clinic sessions, with emphasis on clinical didactic material and review of clinical procedures to support student's clinical learning and progress.  Meeting with clinical preceptors to review progress, to be initiated by the student as needed.
COMP 310	Summer Clinic	.5 - 6 Units	Attendance is mandatory in the summer dental clinic of the third year. Students become acquainted with all aspects of clinical practice and begin providing clinical care for patients.
COMP 358	Clinical Oral Surgery I	1 Unit	This clinical course introduces the student to patient management in clinical oral surgery, which includes infection control, patient evaluation, diagnosis, treatment planning, informed consent, local anesthetic procedures, and routine oral surgery procedures employed in a general dental practice.
COMP 378	Pediatric Dentistry Clinic	1.5 Unit	This clinical experience in dental care for children and adolescents provides the predoctoral student with patient-parent contact and the opportunity to perform comprehensive pediatric dental care such as preventive dentistry, restorative dentistry, pulp therapy, primary teeth exrtractions and space maintenance with pharmacological and non-pharmacological behavior management methods, for the pediatric dental patient.
COMP 384	General Dentistry Clinical Qualifying	1 Unit	This is a clinic course where the students are given the opportunity to demonstrate knowledge in comprehensive treatment planning, health promotion and disease prevention, and the management of a recall system.
COMP 386	Quality Assurance	1 Unit	This course requires student dentists to evaluate their dental records against widely accepted written standards for dental record keeping.  This is known as a comprehensive record audit.  Records are broken down to their component parts, including but not limited to medical history, progress notes, treatment plans, and chartings.  Emphasis is placed on making sure the required components are present, and adequate information is filled in for each component.  Because records are partially electronic and partially written, it is essential that all entries that appear in both records are identical.
COMP 387	General Practice Dentistry A	2.5 Units	This course provides each third year student with basic clinical training and experience in the following disciplines of dentistry: Oral Diagnosis, Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Endodontics, Periodontics, Operative Dentistry, Fixed Prosthodontics, Removable Prosthodontics, Pediatrics, Orthodontics, Geriatrics, Hospital Dentistry.  Each third year student is assigned to a preceptor group which is managed by two master clinician dentists.  These preceptors provide their students with training in diagnosis, treatment planning, sequencing, and the actual treatment of their assigned patients.  Consultations in the various specialties of dentistry occur as required.  The preceptors direct and coordinate the total dental health care of the patients of each of their students.  Monthly seminars are provided by the preceptors of each group to discuss student cases, to review dental techniques and journal articles.  Individual student meetings are scheduled to discuss clinical performance.
COMP 389	General Practice Dentistry B	2.5 Units	This course provides each third year student with basic clinical training and experience in the following disciplines of dentistry: Oral Diagnosis, Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Endodontics, Periodontics, Operative Dentistry, Fixed Prosthodontics, Removable Prosthodontics, Pediatrics, Orthodontics, Geriatrics, Hospital Dentistry.  Each third year student is assigned to a preceptor group which is managed by two master clinician dentists.  These preceptors provide their students with training in diagnosis, treatment planning, sequencing, and the actual treatment of their assigned patients.  Consultations in the various specialties of dentistry occur as required.  The preceptors direct and coordinate the total dental health care of the patients of each of their students.  Monthly seminars are provided by the preceptors of each group to discuss student cases, to review dental techniques and journal articles.  Individual student meetings are scheduled to discuss clinical performance.
COMP 390	General Practice Dentistry A	2.5 Units	This course provides each third year student with basic clinical training and experience in the following disciplines of dentistry: Oral Diagnosis, Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Endodontics, Periodontics, Operative Dentistry, Fixed Prosthodontics, Removable Prosthodontics, Pediatrics, Orthodontics, Geriatrics, Hospital Dentistry.  Each third year student is assigned to a preceptor group which is managed by two master clinician dentists.  These preceptors provide their students with training in diagnosis, treatment planning, sequencing, and the actual treatment of their assigned patients.  Consultations in the various specialties of dentistry occur as required.  The preceptors direct and coordinate the total dental health care of the patients of each of their students.  Monthly seminars are provided by the preceptors of each group to discuss student cases, to review dental techniques and journal articles.  Individual student meetings are scheduled to discuss clinical performance.
COMP 394	General Practice Dentistry B	2.5 Units	This course provides each third year student with basic clinical training and experience in the following disciplines of dentistry: Oral Diagnosis, Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Endodontics, Periodontics, Operative Dentistry, Fixed Prosthodontics, Removable Prosthodontics, Pediatrics, Orthodontics, Geriatrics, Hospital Dentistry.  Each third year student is assigned to a preceptor group which is managed by two master clinician dentists.  These preceptors provide their students with training in diagnosis, treatment planning, sequencing, and the actual treatment of their assigned patients.  Consultations in the various specialties of dentistry occur as required.  The preceptors direct and coordinate the total dental health care of the patients of each of their students.  Monthly seminars are provided by the preceptors of each group to discuss student cases, to review dental techniques and journal articles.  Individual student meetings are scheduled to discuss clinical performance.
COMP 417	Community Oral Health Capstone Experience	1.5 Unit	The course exposes students to a healthcare facility different from the dental school clinic with a different patient population and work force.
COMP 422	Clinical Periodontics	1.5 Unit	Lecture and clinic together in this course enable the student to further apply the knowledge and skills learned in prior periodontal courses while incorporating the impact of systemic conditions and multidisciplinary interactions on periodontic endpoints. It focuses on how selective periodontal treatment can be integrated into a treatment plan considering the parameters presented by a special situation and introduces students to case specific consideration. Some examples are treatment related to specific medical problems, pharmacologic interactions, endodontics, prosthodontics, geriatrics, esthetics, orthodontics and implantology.
COMP 427	Oral Diagnosis and Treatment Planning	1 Unit	Diagnosis and treatment planning based on the correlation of the fundamentals taught in oral diagnosis, oral radiology, physical evaluation, preventive dentistry, and restorative dentistry. Clinical experience in the application of didactic training consists of the following components: 1. assignment in the admitting and radiology clinic where students carry out examinations of newly admitted patients and evaluate their problems and needs; 2. radiology, oral medicine, and medicine interpretation findings by the students is discussed with a faculty member.
COMP 428	Oral Diagnosis and Radiology	.5 Unit	The primary goals of this course are to enable the student to become competent in the collection and interpretation of clinical data, enable the student to become competent in determining the differential and/or definitive diagnosis of oral disease based upon the interpretation of the clinical/laboratory data acquired and enable the student to interact with other health care providers in the medical risk assessment of patients admitted to the School of Dental Medicine.
COMP 448	Endodontics	2 Units	The clinical curriculum provides the major endodontic treatment information for this program. Specific subjects covered are diagnosis, pulp and periapical pathosis, radiology, pharmacology, anesthesia, pain management, emergency treatment, pulp treatment, trauma, mechanical innovations, apexification, bleaching, endodontic-periodontic complexities, preparation of endodontically treated teeth, and endodontic surgery. The above information is designed to provide the student with a basic understanding of the field of endodontics.
COMP 458	Clinical Oral Surgery II	1 Unit	This clinical course involves the hands on application of oral surgery principles including evaluation of the patient's medical status, clinical examination, local anesthesia delivery, extractions, pre-prosthetic procedures, patient management, and infection control.
COMP 464	Operative Dentistry	2.5 Units	Basic and advanced principles of operative dentistry are used to perform dental restorations on patients diagnosed for dental procedures related to operative dentistry.
COMP 468	Removable Prosthodontics	1.5 Unit	The Removable Prosthodontics course is a third - fourth year clinical course which applies principles of removable Prosthodontics.
COMP 474	Fixed Prosthodontics	2.5 Units	The principles of fixed prosthodontics are applied to patient situations that require a fixed restoration to develop function and esthetics that will satisfy the criteria for an acceptable end result for restoring a tooth or for replacing a missing tooth with a fixed restoration.
COMP 478	Pediatric Dentistry	1.5 Unit	This clinical experience in dental care for children and adolescents provides the predoctoral student with patient-parent contact and the opportunity to perform comprehensive pediatric dental care such as preventive dentistry, restorative dentistry, pulp therapy, primary teeth extractions and space maintenance with non-pharmacological behavior management methods, for the pediatric dental patient.
COMP 480	Clinical Geriatric Dentistry	.5 Unit	The course exposes students to providing comprehensive care to a broad range of older adults in a variety of settings. Senior students will attend interdisciplinary team meetings to present dental findings, recommendations and to gain exposure to the impact of physiological aging, systemic conditions, functional disabilities, and pharmacological interactions on delivering comprehensive care to this vulnerable population.
COMP 482	Clinical Orthodontics	1 Unit	Clinical orthodontics provides the student with the opportunity to apply the knowledge that he/she has obtained in facial growth, dentofacial morphology, sophomore orthodontics, and senior orthodontics to assist in and sometimes treat comprehensive, preventive, interceptive and limited corrective tooth movement patients.
COMP 487	General Practice Dentistry A	2.5 Units	Comprehensive dental care. Each student is assigned for clinical training to a preceptor group led by a practicing general dentist. The preceptor guides the students in diagnosis, treatment planning, and actual patient treatment with consultation in various specialties as required. Experiences in the provision of emergency dental care. The preceptor directs the total dental health care of the patients of each of his students. Biweekly seminars are provided for each preceptor group. Special topics, students cases, techniques, and journal articles are discussed. Recommended preparation: Concurrent enrollment in COMP 489.
COMP 489	General Practice Dentistry B	2.5 Units	Comprehensive dental care. Each student is assigned for clinical training to a preceptor group led by a practicing general dentist. The preceptor guides the students in diagnosis, treatment planning, and actual patient treatment with consultation in various specialties as required. Experiences in the provision of emergency dental care. The preceptor directs the total dental health care of the patients of each of his students. Biweekly seminars are provided for each preceptor group. Special topics, students cases, techniques, and journal articles are discussed. Recommended preparation: Concurrent enrollment in COMP 487.
COMP 490	General Practice Dentistry A	2.5 Units	Clinical application of the principles of general practice dentistry. Recommended preparation: Concurrent enrollment in COMP 494.
COMP 492	General Dentistry Clinical Competency	.5 Unit	This course consists of the successful completion of the recall, emergency, diagnosis and treatment planning, and patient outcomes clinical competencies. It is also necessary for the student to successfully fulfill the recall needs of their assigned clinic patients in order to pass this course. Recommended preparation: Completion of Basic Core Program.
COMP 494	General Practice Dentistry B	2.5 Units	Clinical application of the principles of general practice dentistry. Recommended preparation: Concurrent enrollment in COMP 490.
COMP 495	Directed Clinical Studies	.5 - 8 Units	This course is intended to provide students with the opportunity to advance their dental clinical patient skills in the comprehensive care clinics of the School while also providing advanced opportunity for students who are so inclined to focus in individual areas of clinical skills development.
COMP 498	Quality Assurance	1 Unit	This course reinforces quality assurance skills and knowledge provided in the prerequisite course including, but not limited to: providing students with the working knowledge of dental record keeping, as it relates to diagnosis and treatment of pathology; recognition and management of medical illness and disabilities; treatment planning; documentation of pre-existing conditions, current and past treatment; established laboratory protocols; evaluation of reasons for remakes and re-dos; post-treatment evaluation of care. Recommended preparation: COMP 394.
CSDS 132	Programming in Java	3 Units	An in-depth survey of modern programming language features, computer programming and algorithmic problem solving with an emphasis on the Java language. Computers and code compilation; conditional statements, subprograms, loops, methods; object-oriented design, inheritance and polymorphism, abstract classes and interfaces; types, type systems, generic types, abstract data types, strings, arrays, linked lists; software development, modular code design, unit testing; strings, text and file I/O; GUI components, GUI event handling; threads; comparison of Java to C, C++, and C#. Offered as CSDS 132 and ECSE 132. Counts for CAS Quantitative Reasoning Requirement.
CSDS 133	Introduction to Data Science and Engineering for Majors	3 Units	This course is an introduction to data science and analytics.  In the first half of the course, students will develop a basic understanding of how to manipulate, analyze and visualize large data in a distributed computing environment, with an appreciation of open source development, security and privacy issues.  Case studies and team project assignments in the second half of the course will be used to implement the ideas. Topics covered will include: Overview of large scale parallel and distributed (cloud) computing; file systems and file i/o; open source coding and distributed versioning, data query and retrieval; basic data analysis; visualization; data security, privacy and provenance. Prereq: ENGR 131 or CSDS 132.
CSDS 233	Introduction to Data Structures	4 Units	Different representations of data: lists, stacks and queues, trees, graphs, and files.  Manipulation of data: searching and sorting, hashing, recursion and higher order functions.  Abstract data types, templating, and the separation of interface and implementation.  Introduction to asymptotic analysis. The Java language is used to illustrate the concepts and as an implementation vehicle throughout the course. Offered as CSDS 233 and ECSE 233. Prereq: CSDS 132 or ECSE 132.
CSDS 234	Structured and Unstructured Data	3 Units	This course is an introduction to types of data and their representation, storage, processing and analysis. The course has three parts.  In the first part of the course, students will develop a basic understanding and the ability to represent, store, process and analyze structured data. Structured data include catalogs, records, tables, logs, etc., with a fixed dimension and well-defined meaning for each data point. Suitable representation and storage mechanisms include lists and arrays. Relevant techniques include keys, hashes, stacks, queues and trees. In the second part of the course, students will develop a basic understanding and the ability to represent, store, process and analyze semi-structured data. Semi-structured data include texts, web pages and networks, without a dimension and structure, but with well-defined meaning for each data point. Suitable representation and storage mechanisms include trees, graphs and RDF triples. Relevant techniques include XML, YAML, JSON, parsing, annotation, language processing. In the third part of the course, students will develop a basic understanding and the ability to represent, store, process and analyze unstructured data. Unstructured data include images, video, and time series data, without neither a fixed dimension and structure, nor well-defined meaning for individual data points. Suitable representation and storage mechanisms include large matrices, EDF, DICOM. Relevant techniques include feature extraction, segmentation, clustering, rendering, indexing, and visualization. Prereq: CSDS 133.
CSDS 236	Introduction to C/C++ Programming	1 Unit	This course provides an introduction to C and C++ programming languages. Prior knowledge of these languages is not expected. However, students are expected to know at least one programming language prior to the class. The lectures will cover low-level programming techniques and object-oriented class design. Students will learn specific topics in C/C++ including required background knowledge, pointers & references, memory management, inheritance, polymorphism, templates, exceptions, use of debugging and compiler tools, and others as time permits. Prereq: CSDS 132.
CSDS 245	Functional Programming in Java	1 Unit	An introduction to functional programming elements and attendant constructs in the Java programming language. Generics, enumerated types, records, and access to class members. Advanced control flow. The Java Collection Framework. Functional interfaces: lambdas, comparators, and standard functional interfaces. Optionals. Stream, collectors, and map-reduce. Prereq: CSDS 132.
CSDS 275	Fundamentals of Robotics	4 Units	The Fundamentals of Robotics course will expose students to fundamental principles of robotics.  Students will explore high level conceptual foundations of robotics beginning with Braitenberg vehicles and apply this knowledge to simulated and physical robot hardware in laboratory experiences and in a final project.  Laboratory experiences will guide students through applying theory to practice increasingly complex tasks in a project oriented, group work environment.  The course culminates in a robotics challenge project at the end of the semester.  Topics covered are: sensors, actuators, kinematics, control, planning and programming.  Programming languages and concepts (e.g., C++, object oriented programming) used in robotics will be introduced and used with modern robotics programming toolboxes and frameworks.  Prior experience with these languages will not be necessary.  Previous experience with robotics is not required for this course. Offered as CSDS 275 and ECSE 275. Prereq: (ENGR 131 or CSDS 132) and PHYS 121 and MATH 121.
CSDS 281	Logic Design and Computer Organization	4 Units	Fundamentals of digital systems in terms of both computer organization and logic level design.  Organization of digital computers; information representation; boolean algebra; analysis and synthesis of combinational and sequential circuits; datapaths and register transfers; instruction sets and assembly language; input/output and communication; memory. Offered as CSDS 281 and ECSE 281. Prereq: ENGR 131 or CSDS 132.
CSDS 285	Linux Tools and Scripting	3 Units	A fast paced introduction to linux that brings the project-oriented student from little or no linux experience to be fully capable of using scripting languages as tools in a linux command-line environment. This includes systems administration and agile web services with server-side scripting and server-side management. This also involves data cleaning, scraping, wrangling, and processing user data with regular expressions. Current main languages include php, bash, awk, with some client-side javascript, and very brief looks at tcl/lua, powershell, and python. Tools include vim, make, grep/sed, and curl/wget. Recommended preparation: one year of computer programming and familiarity with raw HTML/CSS. Prereq: CSDS 132.
CSDS 290	Introduction to Computer Game Design and Implementation	3 Units	This class begins with an examination of the history of video games and of game design. Games will be examined in a systems context to understand gaming and game design fundamentals. Various topics relating directly to the implementation of computer games will be introduced including graphics, animation, artificial intelligence, user interfaces, the simulation of motion, sound generation, and networking. Extensive study of past and current computer games will be used to illustrate course concepts. Individual and group projects will be used throughout the semester to motivate, illustrate and demonstrate the course concepts and ideas. Group game development and implementation projects will culminate in classroom presentation and evaluation. Offered as CSDS 290 and ECSE 290. Prereq: CSDS 132.
CSDS 293	Software Craftsmanship	4 Units	A course to improve programming skills, software quality, and the software development process.  Software design; Version control; Control issues and routines;  Pseudo-code programming process and developer testing; Defensive programming; Classes; Debugging; Self-documenting code; Refactoring. Offered as CSDS 293 and CSDS 293N. Prereq: Computer Science Major and CSDS 233 with a C or higher.
CSDS 293N	Software Craftsmanship	4 Units	A course to improve programming skills, software quality, and the software development process.  Software design; Version control; Control issues and routines;  Pseudo-code programming process and developer testing; Defensive programming; Classes; Debugging; Self-documenting code; Refactoring. Offered as CSDS 293 and CSDS 293N. Prereq: CSDS 233 with a C or higher.
CSDS 296	Independent Projects	1 - 3 Units	Independent projects in Computer and Data Science.  Recommended preparation: ENGR 131 or CSDS 132. Prereq: Limited to first year and sophomore undergraduate students.
CSDS 297	Special Topics	1 - 3 Units	Special topics in Computer and Data Science. Prereq: Limited to first year and sophomore undergraduate students.
CSDS 302	Discrete Mathematics	3 Units	A general introduction to basic mathematical terminology and the techniques of abstract mathematics in the context of discrete mathematics. Topics introduced are mathematical reasoning, Boolean connectives, deduction, mathematical induction, sets, functions and relations, algorithms, graphs, combinatorial reasoning. Offered as CSDS 302, ECSE 302 and MATH 304. Prereq: MATH 122 or MATH 124 or MATH 126.
CSDS 305	Files, Indexes and Access Structures for Big Data	3 Units	Database management become a central component of a modern computing environment, and, as a result, knowledge about database systems has become an essential part of education in computer science and data science. This course is an introduction to the nature and purpose of database systems, fundamental concepts for designing, implementing and querying a database and database architectures. Objectives: -An expert knowledge of basic data structures, basic searching, sorting, methods, algorithm techniques, (such as greedy and divide and conquer) -In-depth knowledge on Search and Index Structures for large, heterogeneous data including multidimensional data, high dimensional data and data in metric spaces (e.g., sequences, images), on different search methods (e.g. similarity searching, partial match, exact match), and on dimensionality reduction techniques. Prereq: CSDS 234 or ECSE 233.
CSDS 310	Algorithms	3 Units	Fundamentals in algorithm design and analysis. Loop invariants, asymptotic notation, recurrence relations, sorting algorithms, divide-and-conquer, dynamic programming, greedy algorithms, basic graph algorithms. Offered as CSDS 310 and CSDS 310N. Prereq: (Computer Science Major/Minor or Data Science Major or Biomedical Engineering Major on the Computing and Analysis Track) and (CSDS 302 or ECSE 302 or MATH 304 with a C or higher) and (CSDS 233 or ECSE 233 with a C or higher).
CSDS 310N	Algorithms	3 Units	Fundamentals in algorithm design and analysis. Loop invariants, asymptotic notation, recurrence relations, sorting algorithms, divide-and-conquer, dynamic programming, greedy algorithms, basic graph algorithms. Offered as CSDS 310 and CSDS 310N. Prereq: (CSDS 302 or ECSE 302 or MATH 304) with a C or higher and (CSDS 233 or ECSE 233) with a C or higher.
CSDS 312	Introduction to Data Science Systems	3 Units	An introduction to the software and hardware architecture of data science systems, with an emphasis on Operating Systems and Computer Architecture that are relevant to Data Sciences systems. At the end of the course, the student should understand the principles and architecture of storage systems, file systems (especially, HDFS), memory hierarchy, and GPU. The student should have carried out projects in these areas, and should be able to critically compare various design decisions in terms of capability and performance. Prereq: CSDS 132.
CSDS 313	Introduction to Data Analysis	3 Units	In this class we will give a broad overview of data analysis techniques, covering techniques from data mining, machine learning and signal processing.  Students will also learn about probabilistic representations, how to conduct an empirical study and support empirical hypotheses through statistical tests, and visualize the results. Course objectives: -Expose students to different analysis approaches. -Understand probabilistic representations and inference mechanisms. -Understand how to create empirical hypotheses and how to test them. Prereq: CSDS 310 and CSDS 234.
CSDS 314	Computer Architecture	3 Units	This course provides students the opportunity to study and evaluate a modern computer architecture design.  The course covers topics in fundamentals of computer design, performance, cost, instruction set design, processor implementation, control unit, pipelining, communication and network, memory hierarchy, computer arithmetic, input-output, and an introduction to RISC and super-scalar processors. Offered as CSDS 314 and ECSE 314. Prereq: CSDS 281.
CSDS 325	Computer Networks I	3 Units	An introduction to computer networks and the Internet.  Applications: http, ftp, e-mail, DNS, socket programming.  Transport: UDP, TCP, reliable data transfer, and congestion control.  Network layer: IP, routing, and NAT.  Link layer: taxonomy, Ethernet, 802.11. Offered as CSDS 325 and CSDS 325N. Prereq: Computer Science Major with minimum Junior Standing and CSDS 233 with a C or higher.
CSDS 325N	Computer Networks I	3 Units	An introduction to computer networks and the Internet.  Applications: http, ftp, e-mail, DNS, socket programming.  Transport: UDP, TCP, reliable data transfer, and congestion control.  Network layer: IP, routing, and NAT.  Link layer: taxonomy, Ethernet, 802.11. Offered as CSDS 325 and CSDS 325N. Prereq: Minimum Junior Standing and CSDS 233 with a C or higher.
CSDS 335	Data Mining for Big Data	3 Units	With the unprecedented rate at which data is being collected today in almost all fields of human endeavor, there is an emerging economic and scientific need to extract useful information from it. Data mining is the process of automatic discovery of patterns, changes, associations and anomalies in massive databases, and is a highly interdisciplinary field representing the confluence of several disciplines, including database systems, data warehousing, machine learning, statistics, algorithms, data visualization, and high-performance computing. This course is an introduction to the commonly used data mining techniques. In the first part of the course, students will develop a basic understanding of the basic concepts in data mining such as frequent pattern mining, association rule mining, basic techniques for data preprocessing such as normalization, regression, and classic matrix decomposition methods such as SVD, LU, and QR decompositions. In the second part of the course, students will develop a basic understanding of classification and clustering and be able to apply classic methods such as k-means, hierarchical clustering methods, nearest neighbor methods, association based classifiers. In the third part of the course, students will have a chance to study more advanced data mining applications such as feature selection in high-dimensional data, dimension reduction, and mining biological datasets. Prereq: CSDS 234 and CSDS 313.
CSDS 337	Compiler Design	4 Units	Design and implementation of compilers and other language processors. Scanners and lexical analysis; regular expressions and finite automata; scanner generators; parsers and syntax analysis; context free grammars; parser generators; semantic analysis; intermediate code generation; runtime environments; code generation; machine independent optimizations; data flow and dependence analysis. There will be a significant programming project involving the use of compiler tools and software development tools and techniques. Offered as CSDS 337 and ECSE 337. Prereq: CSDS 233 and CSDS 281.
CSDS 338	Intro to Operating Systems and Concurrent Programming	4 Units	Intro to OS: OS Structures, processes, threads, CPU scheduling, deadlocks, memory management, file system implementations, virtual machines, cloud computing. Concurrent programming: fork, join, concurrent statement, critical section problem, safety and liveness properties of concurrent programs, process synchronization algorithms, semaphores, monitors.  UNIX systems programming: system calls, UNIX System V IPCs, threads, RPCs, shell programming. Offered as CSDS 338, ECSE, 338, CSDS 338N and ECSE 338N. Prereq: Computer Science Major or Minor and CSDS 233 with a C or higher.
CSDS 338N	Intro to Operating Systems and Concurrent Programming	4 Units	Intro to OS: OS Structures, processes, threads, CPU scheduling, deadlocks, memory management, file system implementations, virtual machines, cloud computing. Concurrent programming: fork, join, concurrent statement, critical section problem, safety and liveness properties of concurrent programs, process synchronization algorithms, semaphores, monitors.  UNIX systems programming: system calls, UNIX System V IPCs, threads, RPCs, shell programming. Offered as CSDS 338, ECSE, 338, CSDS 338N and ECSE 338N. Prereq: CSDS 233 with a C or higher.
CSDS 340	Machine Learning for Big Data	3 Units	Machine learning is a sub-field of Artificial Intelligence that is concerned with the design and analysis of algorithms that "learn" and improve with experience, While the broad aim behind research in this area is to build systems that can simulate or even improve on certain aspects of human intelligence, algorithms developed in this area have become very useful in analyzing and predicting the behavior of complex systems. Machine learning algorithms have been used to guide diagnostic systems in medicine, recommend interesting products to customers in e-commerce, play games at human championship levels, and solve many other very complex problems. This course is an introduction to algorithms for machine learning and their implementation in the context of big data. We will study different learning settings, the different algorithms that have been developed for these settings, and learn about how to implement these algorithms and evaluate their behavior in practice. We will also discuss dealing with noise, missing values, scalability properties and talk about tools and libraries available for these methods. At the end of the course, you should be able to: --Understand when to use machine learning algorithms; --Understand, represent and formulate the learning problem; --Apply the appropriate algorithm(s) or tools, with an understanding of the tradeoffs involved including scalability and robustness; --Correctly evaluate the behavior of the algorithm when solving the problem. Prereq: CSDS 234 and CSDS 313.
CSDS 341	Introduction to Database Systems	3 Units	Relational model, ER model, relational algebra and calculus, SQL, OBE, security, views, files and physical database structures, query processing and query optimization, normalization theory, concurrency control, object relational systems, multimedia databases, Oracle SQL server, Microsoft SQL server. Offered as CSDS 341 and CSDS 341N. Prereq: Computer Science Major or Data Science and Analytics Major and (CSDS 302 or ECSE 302 or MATH 304) and (CSDS233 or ECSE 233) with a C or higher.
CSDS 341N	Introduction to Database Systems	3 Units	Relational model, ER model, relational algebra and calculus, SQL, OBE, security, views, files and physical database structures, query processing and query optimization, normalization theory, concurrency control, object relational systems, multimedia databases, Oracle SQL server, Microsoft SQL server. Offered as CSDS 341 and CSDS 341N. Prereq: (CSDS 302 or ECSE 302 or MATH 304) with a grade of C or higher and (CSDS 233 or ECSE 233) with a C or higher.
CSDS 343	Theoretical Computer Science	3 Units	Introduction to different classes of automata and their correspondence to different classes of formal languages and grammars, computability, complexity and various proof techniques.   Offered as CSDS 343 and MATH 343. Prereq: CSDS 302 or MATH 304.
CSDS 344	Computer Security	3 Units	General types of security attacks; approaches to prevention; secret key and public key cryptography; message authentication and hash functions; digital signatures and authentication protocols; information gathering; password cracking; spoofing; session hijacking; denial of service attacks; buffer overruns; viruses, worms, etc., principles of secure software design, threat modeling; access control; least privilege; storing secrets; socket security; firewalls; intrusions; auditing; mobile security. Recommended preparation: CSDS 132, CSDS 293, CSDS 325 and CSDS 338. Offered as CSDS 344 and CSDS 444.
CSDS 345	Programming Language Concepts	3 Units	This course examines the four main programming paradigms: imperative, object-oriented, functional, and logical. It is assumed that students will come to the course with significant exposure to object-oriented programming and some exposure to imperative programming.  The course will teach the functional paradigm in depth, enhance the students' knowledge of the object-oriented and imperative paradigms, and introduce the logical paradigm. The course will explore language syntax, semantics, names/scopes, types, expressions, assignment, subprograms, abstraction and inheritance.  This exploration will have several forms. Students will study the programming language concepts at a theoretical level, use the concepts in functional language programming, and implement the concepts by designing language interpreters. Offered as CSDS 345 and CSDS 345N. Prereq: Computer Science Major and (CSDS 302 or ECSE 302 or MATH 304) with a C or higher and (CSDS 233 or ECSE 233) with a C or higher.
CSDS 345N	Programming Language Concepts	3 Units	This course examines the four main programming paradigms: imperative, object-oriented, functional, and logical. It is assumed that students will come to the course with significant exposure to object-oriented programming and some exposure to imperative programming.  The course will teach the functional paradigm in depth, enhance the students' knowledge of the object-oriented and imperative paradigms, and introduce the logical paradigm. The course will explore language syntax, semantics, names/scopes, types, expressions, assignment, subprograms, abstraction and inheritance.  This exploration will have several forms. Students will study the programming language concepts at a theoretical level, use the concepts in functional language programming, and implement the concepts by designing language interpreters. Offered as CSDS 345 and CSDS 345N. Prereq: (CSDS 302 or ECSE 302 or MATH 304) with a C or higher and (CSDS 233 or ECSE 233) with a C or higher.
CSDS 356	Data Privacy	3 Units	Introduction to privacy, economics and incentives, crypto-based solution for privacy, hiding data from the database user, hiding access patterns from the database owner, anonymous routing and TOR, privacy in online social networks, privacy in cellular and Wi-Fi networks, location privacy, privacy in e-cash systems, privacy in e-voting, genomic privacy. Offered as CSDS 356 and CSDS 456. Prereq: (CSDS 132 and CSDS 233 and any STAT course) or (Graduate student in Computer Science or Computer Engineering).
CSDS 364	Computational Perception	3 Units	An introduction to the information processing and computational algorithms that underlie perception. The course focuses on vision and audition but also covers other senses and various types of perceptual processing in biological systems. The motivating question is: What are the fundamental computational problems faced by perceptual systems in complex environments? The course draws from fields in engineering and the study of biological perception. Specific topics include signal detection and processing; sound localization; motion perception and estimation; sensory coding; perception of structure; active perception; perceptual invariance; attention; object, sound and speech recognition; visual and auditory scene analysis. Offered as CSDS 364 and CSDS 464. Prereq: CSDS 132 or ENGR 131.
CSDS 366	Computer Graphics	3 Units	Theory and practice of computer graphics: object and environment representation including coordinate transformations image extraction including perspective, hidden surface, and shading algorithms; and interaction.  Covers a wide range of graphic display devices and systems with emphasis in interactive shaded graphics. Offered as CSDS 366, ECSE 366, CSDS 466 and ECSE 466. Prereq: CSDS 233.
CSDS 373	Modern Robot Programming	3 Units	The goal of this course is to learn modern methods for building up robot capabilities using the Robot Operating System (ROS). Through a sequence of assignments, students learn how to write software to control both simulated and physical robots. Material includes: interfacing software to robot I/O; path and trajectory planning for robot arms; object identification and localization from 3-D sensing; manipulation planning; and development of graphical interfaces for supervisory robot control. Laboratory assignments are scheduled in small groups to explore implementations on specific robots.  Graduate students will also perform an independent project. Offered as CSDS 373, ECSE 373, CSDS 473 and ECSE 473.
CSDS 376	Mobile Robotics	4 Units	Design of software systems for mobile robot control, including: motion control; sensory processing; localization and mapping; mobile-robot planning and navigation; and implementation of goal-directed behaviors.  The course has a heavy lab component involving a sequence of design challenges and competitions performed in teams. Offered as CSDS 376 and ECSE 376. Prereq:  CSDS 373 or CSDS 473.
CSDS 377	Introduction to Connected Devices	3 Units	Introduction to Connected Devices (e.g., Internet of Things).  Undergraduates work in pairs to build a complete connected-device system, an embedded device with wireless networking, cloud and web, and mobile, and then develop hands-on experience with systems-level aspects of the connected-device system, including analytics, remote firmware update, load testing, and essential security.  Students learn about current architectures, languages, and technologies, such as Pub/Sub (MQTT), Python, Objective-C, Python Django, JavaScript, HTML/CSS, and Bluetooth Low Energy. Offered as CSDS 377 and ECSE 377.
CSDS 386	Quantum Computing, Information, and Devices	3 Units	An introduction to the math, physics, engineering, and computer science underlying the rapidly emerging fields of quantum computing, quantum information, and quantum devices. The course is taught by a group of faculty from physics, engineering, computer science, and math, and is geared towards students with diverse backgrounds and interests in these fields.  Students will select a concentration in one of these four areas, and the coursework, while still covering all topics, will be adjusted to focus on the selected area in the most detail.  Note that the listed prerequisites depend on choice of concentration.   Topics will include: 1	(Mathematics) Introduction to linear algebra, convex geometry, fundamental theory of quantum information. 2	(Physics) Introduction to the quantum mechanics of two-level systems (qubits). Survey of physics and materials for qubit technologies. 3	(Computer Science) Basic quantum gates and circuits, introduction to the theory of algorithms, survey of quantum algorithms. 4	(Engineering) Quantum architectures, mapping algorithms onto circuits.  The course consists of lectures, homework, and group projects.  Group projects will aim to synthesize the diverse backgrounds of the students and instructors to capture the interdisciplinary nature of the field. Students taking the course for graduate credit will complete an additional literature research project and presentation, in addition to enhanced problem sets. Offered as CSDS 386, CSDS 486, ECSE 386, ECSE 486, MATH 386, MATH 486, PHYS 386, and PHYS 486. Prereq: (CSDS 233 or ECSE 233) and (CSDS 281 or ECSE 281) and (MATH 201 or MATH 307) and (MATH 223 or MATH 227) and (PHYS 122 or PHYS 124).
CSDS 390	Advanced Game Development Project	3 Units	This game development project course will bring together an inter-professional group of students in the fields of engineering, computer science, and art to focus on the design and development of a complete, fully functioning computer game as an interdisciplinary team. The student teams are given complete liberty to design their own fully functional games from their original concept to a playable game published in an online marketplace. Student teams will experience the entire game development cycle as they execute their projects. Responsibilities include creating a game idea, writing a story, developing the artwork, designing characters, implementing music and sound effects, programming and testing the game, and publishing the final project. Students enrolled in 487 will develop a healthcare or education virtual environment or video game in collaboration with a mentor who has expertise in the chosen area. Offered as CSDS 390, ECSE 390, CSDS 487, and ECSE 487. Prereq: CSDS 233 and CSDS 290.
CSDS 391	Introduction to Artificial Intelligence	3 Units	This course is an introduction to artificial intelligence.  We will study the concepts that underlie intelligent systems.  Topics covered include problem solving with search, constraint satisfaction, adversarial games, knowledge representation and reasoning using propositional and first order logic, reasoning under uncertainty, introduction to machine learning, automated planning, reinforcement learning and natural language processing.   Recommended: basic knowledge of probability and statistics. Prereq: ENGR 131 or CSDS 132 or ECSE 132.
CSDS 392	App Development for iOS	3 Units	This course is an introduction to app development for iPhone and iPad using Cocoa Touch Framework and Xcode development environment. Topics include Swift programming language and iOS SDK/foundations, object-oriented design and model-view-controller framework, user interface design using Xcode. Additional topics may include data management, map applications, animations and some recent developments in iOS.  Recommended preparation: experiences in object-oriented programming and Mac OS; knowledge in software engineering and databases. Prereq: CSDS 293 and Junior or Senior standing.
CSDS 393	Software Engineering	3 Units	Topics: Introduction to software engineering; software lifecycle models; development team organization and project management; requirements analysis and specification techniques; software design techniques; programming practices; software validation techniques; software maintenance practices; software engineering ethics. Undergraduates work in teams to complete a significant software development project. Graduate students are required to complete a research project. Offered as CSDS 393, CSDS 393N, and CSDS 493. Prereq: (Computer Science Major/Minor or Data Science Major) and (CSDS 233 or ECSE 233) with a C or higher.
CSDS 393N	Software Engineering	3 Units	Topics: Introduction to software engineering; software lifecycle models; development team organization and project management; requirements analysis and specification techniques; software design techniques; programming practices; software validation techniques; software maintenance practices; software engineering ethics. Undergraduates work in teams to complete a significant software development project. Graduate students are required to complete a research project. Offered as CSDS 393, CSDS 393N, and CSDS 493. Prereq: CSDS 233 or ECSE 233 with a C or higher.
CSDS 394	Introduction to Information Theory	3 Units	This course is intended as an introduction to information and coding theory with emphasis on the mathematical aspects.  It is suitable for advanced undergraduate and graduate students in mathematics, applied mathematics, statistics, physics, computer science and electrical engineering.    Course content: Information measures-entropy, relative entropy, mutual information, and their properties.  Typical sets and sequences, asymptotic equipartition property, data compression.  Channel coding and capacity: channel coding theorem.  Differential entropy, Gaussian channel, Shannon-Nyquist theorem. Information theory inequalities (400 level). Additional topics, which may include compressed sensing and elements of quantum information theory. Recommended preparation: MATH 201 or MATH 307. Offered as MATH 394, CSDS 394, ECSE 394, MATH 494, CSDS 494 and ECSE 494. Prereq: MATH 223 and MATH 380 or requisites not met permission.
CSDS 395	Senior Project in Computer Science	4 Units	Capstone course for computer science seniors.  Material from previous and concurrent courses used to solve computer programming problems and to develop software systems.  Professional engineering topics such as project management, engineering design, communications, and professional ethics.  Requirements include periodic reporting of progress, plus a final oral presentation and written report.  Scheduled formal project presentations during last week of classes. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: Senior standing.
CSDS 396	Independent Projects	1 - 6 Units	Independent projects in Computer and Data Science. Prereq: Limited to juniors and seniors.
CSDS 397	Special Topics	1 - 6 Units	Special topics in Computer and Data Science. Prereq: Limited to juniors and seniors.
CSDS 398	Senior Project in Data Science	4 Units	Capstone course for data science seniors. Material from previous and concurrent courses used to apply tools of the data science lifecycle to practical applications. Professional engineering topics such as project management, engineering design, communications, and professional ethics. Requirements include periodic reporting of progress, plus a final oral presentation and written report. Scheduled formal project presentations during the last week of classes. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: Data Science & Analytics Major and Senior standing.
CSDS 400T	Graduate Teaching I	0 Unit	This course will provide the Ph.D. candidate with experience in teaching undergraduate or graduate students.  The experience is expected to involve direct student contact but will be based upon the specific departmental needs and teaching obligations.  This teaching experience will be conducted under the supervision of the faculty member who is responsible for the course, but the academic advisor will assess the educational plan to ensure that it provides an educational experience for the student.  Students in this course may be expected to perform one or more of the following teaching related activities: grading homeworks, quizzes, and exams, having office hours for students, tutoring students. Recommended preparation: Ph.D. student in CSDS department.
CSDS 401	Foundations of Computer Science	4.5 Units	Introduction to computer science for graduate level students. Covers the basic concepts of data structures and discrete mathematics and combines theory and practice. Representations and manipulation of data, abstract data types, generics, separation of interface and implementation. Mathematical reasoning, Boolean connectives, induction, sets, algorithms, graphs, and combinatorial reasoning. Prereq: CSDS 132 and (MATH 122 or MATH 124 or MATH 126).
CSDS 405	Data Structures and File Management	3 Units	Fundamental concepts: sequential allocation, linked allocation, lists, trees, graphs, internal sorting, external sorting, sequential, binary, interpolation search, hashing file, indexed files, multiple level index structures, btrees, hashed files. Multiple attribute retrieval; inverted files, multi lists, multiple-key hashing, hd trees. Introduction to data bases. Data models. Recommended preparation: CSDS 233 and MATH 304. Prereq: CSDS 341 or Graduate standing.
CSDS 410	Analysis of Algorithms	3 Units	This course covers fundamental topics in algorithm design and analysis in depth. Amortized analysis, NP-completeness and reductions, dynamic programming, advanced graph algorithms, string algorithms, geometric algorithms, local search heuristics. Offered as CSDS 410 and OPRE 454. Prereq: CSDS 310.
CSDS 425	Computer Networks I	3 Units	An introduction to computer networks and the Internet. Applications: http, ftp, e-mail, DNS, socket programming. Transport: UDP, TCP, reliable data transfer, and congestion control. Network layer: IP, routing and NAT. Link layer: taxonomy, Ethernet, 802.11. Recommended preparation: CSDS 338.
CSDS 427	Internet Security and Privacy	3 Units	This course introduces students to research on Internet security and privacy. Covered topics include denial of service attacks, attacks enabled by man-in-the-middle surveillance, communication hijacking, botnet and fast-flux networks, email and Web spam, threats to privacy on the Internet, and Internet censorship. The course will be based on a collection of research papers. Students will be required to attend lectures, read the materials, prepare written summaries of discussed papers, present a paper in class, complete a course project and take the final exam (in the form of the course project presentation). Prereq: CSDS 325 or CSDS 425 or graduate standing in Computer Science or Computer Engineering.
CSDS 428	Computer Communications Networks II	3 Units	Introduction to topics and methodology in computer networks and middleware research. Traffic characterization, stochastic models, and self-similarity. Congestion control (Tahoe, Reno, Sack). Active Queue Management (RED, FQ) and explicit QoS. The Web: overview and components, HTTP, its interaction with TCP, caching. Overlay networks and CDN. Expected work includes a course-long project on network simulation, a final project, a paper presentation, midterm, and final test. Recommended preparation: CSDS 425.
CSDS 433	Database Systems	3 Units	Basic issues in file processing and database management systems. Physical data organization. Relational databases. Database design. Relational Query Languages, SQL. Query languages. Query optimization. Database integrity and security. Object-oriented databases. Object-oriented Query Languages, OQL. Recommended preparation: MATH 304. Prereq: CSDS 341 or Graduate standing.
CSDS 435	Data Mining	3 Units	Data Mining is the process of discovering interesting knowledge from large amounts of data stored either in databases, data warehouses, or other information repositories. Topics to be covered includes: Data Warehouse and OLAP technology for data mining, Data Preprocessing, Data Mining Primitives, Languages, and System Architectures, Mining Association Rules from Large Databases, Classification and Prediction, Cluster Analysis, Mining Complex Types of Data, and Applications and Trends in Data Mining. Prereq: CSDS 341 or Graduate standing.
CSDS 438	High Performance Data and Computing	3 Units	High performance data and computing (HPDC) leverages parallel processing in order to maximize speed and throughput. This hands-on course will cover theoretical and practical aspects of HPDC. Theoretical concepts covered include computer architecture, parallel programming, and performance optimization. Practical applications will be discussed from various information and scientific fields. Practical considerations will include HPDC job management and Unix scripting. Weekly assessments and a course project will be required. Offered as CSDS 438 and ECSE 438. Prereq: CSDS 233 or graduate standing.
CSDS 440	Machine Learning	3 Units	Machine learning is a subfield of Artificial Intelligence that is concerned with the design and analysis of algorithms that "learn" and improve with experience,  While the broad aim behind research in this area is to build systems that can simulate or even improve on certain aspects of human intelligence, algorithms developed in this area have become very useful in analyzing and predicting the behavior of complex systems.  Machine learning algorithms have been used to guide diagnostic systems in medicine, recommend interesting products to customers in e-commerce, play games at human championship levels, and solve many other very complex problems.  This course is focused on algorithms for machine learning: their design, analysis and implementation.  We will study different learning settings, including supervised, semi-supervised and unsupervised learning.  We will study different ways of representing the learning problem, using propositional, multiple-instance and relational representations.  We will study the different algorithms that have been developed for these settings, such as decision trees, neural networks, support vector machines, k-means, harmonic functions and Bayesian methods.  We will learn about the theoretical tradeoffs in the design of these algorithms, and how to evaluate their behavior in practice.  At the end of the course, you should be able to:    --Recognize situations where machine learning algorithms are applicable;    --Understand, represent and formulate the learning problem;    --Apply the appropriate algorithm(s), or if necessary, design your own, with an understanding of the tradeoffs involved;    --Correctly evaluate the behavior of the algorithm when solving the problem. Prereq: CSDS 391 or CSDS 491.
CSDS 442	Causal Learning from Data	3 Units	This course introduces key concepts and techniques for characterizing, from observational or experimental study data and from background information, the causal effect of a specific treatment, exposure, or intervention (e.g., a medical treatment) upon an outcome of interest (e.g., disease status). The fundamental problem of causal inference is the impossibility of observing the effects of different and incompatible treatments on the same individual or unit.  This problem is overcome by estimating an average causal effect over a study population.  Making valid causal inferences with observational data is especially challenging, because of the greater potential for biases (confounding bias, selection bias, and measurement bias) that can badly distort causal effect estimates.  Consequently, this topic has been the focus of intense cross-disciplinary research in recent years.  Causal inference techniques will be illustrated by applications in several fields such as computer science, engineering, medicine, public health, biology, genomics, neuroscience, economics, and social science.  Course grading will be based on quizzes, homeworks, a class presentation, and a causal data analysis project.  Specific topics: treatments, exposures, and interventions; causal effects and causal effect measures; confounding bias; potential outcomes and counterfactuals; randomized experiments; observational studies; causal directed acyclic graphs (DAGs); exchangeability and conditional exchangeability; effect modification; causal interactions; nonparametric structural equations; Pearl's Back-Door Criterion, Front-Door Criterion, and related results; covariate adjustment; matching on covariates; selection bias; measurement bias; instrumental variables; causal modeling; inverse probability weighting; marginal structural models; standardization; structural nested models; outcome regression; propensity scores; sensitivity analysis. Prereq: CSDS 440 or MATH 380 or STAT 312 or STAT 313 or STAT 332 or STAT 333 or Requisites Not Met permission.
CSDS 444	Computer Security	3 Units	General types of security attacks; approaches to prevention; secret key and public key cryptography; message authentication and hash functions; digital signatures and authentication protocols; information gathering; password cracking; spoofing; session hijacking; denial of service attacks; buffer overruns; viruses, worms, etc., principles of secure software design, threat modeling; access control; least privilege; storing secrets; socket security; firewalls; intrusions; auditing; mobile security. Recommended preparation: CSDS 132, CSDS 293, CSDS 325 and CSDS 338. Offered as CSDS 344 and CSDS 444.
CSDS 448	Smartphone Security	3 Units	This course is designed to better prepare undergraduate and graduate students for researching and developing in the neighborhood of mobile and software security. Lectures, paper readings and presentations, in-class discussions, and projects are the main components. The course covers the basics of Android programming and a wide range of security issues and solutions concerning mobile platforms, including permission analysis, textual artifacts analysis, malware analysis, program analysis, and UI analysis. Students should expect one literature survey paper and one system-building or empirical study project on one selected security solution in mobile app security. Prereq: CSDS 132 and a Graduate or Undergraduate Computer Science major.
CSDS 455	Applied Graph Theory	3 Units	This course serves as an introduction to many of the important aspects of graph theory. Topics include connectivity, flows, matchings, planar graphs, and graph coloring with additional topics selected from extremal graphs, random graphs, bounded treewidth graphs, social networks and small world graphs. The class will explore the underlying mathematical theory with a specific focus on the development and analysis of graph algorithms. Prereq: Graduate student or (CSDS 302 or MATH 304 or MATH 305 or MATH 307).
CSDS 456	Data Privacy	3 Units	Introduction to privacy, economics and incentives, crypto-based solution for privacy, hiding data from the database user, hiding access patterns from the database owner, anonymous routing and TOR, privacy in online social networks, privacy in cellular and Wi-Fi networks, location privacy, privacy in e-cash systems, privacy in e-voting, genomic privacy. Offered as CSDS 356 and CSDS 456. Prereq: (CSDS 132 and CSDS 233 and any STAT course) or (Graduate student in Computer Science or Computer Engineering).
CSDS 458	Introduction to Bioinformatics	3 Units	Fundamental algorithmic and statistical methods in computational molecular biology and bioinformatics will be discussed. Topics include introduction to molecular biology and genetics, DNA sequence analysis, polymorphisms and personal genomics, structural variation analysis, gene mapping and haplotyping algorithms, phylogenetic analysis, biological network analysis, and computational drug discovery. Much of the course will focus on the algorithmic techniques, including but not limited to, dynamic programming, hidden Markov models, string algorithms, graph theories and algorithms, and some representative data mining algorithms. Paper presentations and course projects are also required. Prereq: CSDS 310 or Graduate standing.
CSDS 459	Bioinformatics for Systems Biology	3 Units	Description of omic data (biological sequences, gene expression, protein-protein interactions, protein-DNA interactions, protein expression, metabolomics, biological ontologies), regulatory network inference, topology of regulatory networks, computational inference of protein-protein interactions, protein interaction databases, topology of protein interaction networks, module and protein complex discovery, network alignment and mining, computational models for network evolution, network-based functional inference, metabolic pathway databases, topology of metabolic pathways, flux models for analysis of metabolic networks, network integration, inference of domain-domain interactions, signaling pathway inference from protein interaction networks, network models and algorithms for disease gene identification, identification of dysregulated subnetworks network-based disease classification. Offered as CSDS 459 and SYBB 459. Prereq: CSDS 458 or BIOL 250.
CSDS 464	Computational Perception	3 Units	An introduction to the information processing and computational algorithms that underlie perception. The course focuses on vision and audition but also covers other senses and various types of perceptual processing in biological systems. The motivating question is: What are the fundamental computational problems faced by perceptual systems in complex environments? The course draws from fields in engineering and the study of biological perception. Specific topics include signal detection and processing; sound localization; motion perception and estimation; sensory coding; perception of structure; active perception; perceptual invariance; attention; object, sound and speech recognition; visual and auditory scene analysis. Offered as CSDS 364 and CSDS 464. Prereq: CSDS 132 or ENGR 131.
CSDS 465	Computer Vision	3 Units	The goal of computer vision is to create visual systems that recognize objects and recover structures in complex 3D scenes.  This course emphasizes both the science behind our understanding of the fundamental problems in vision and the engineering that develops mathematical models and inference algorithms to solve these problems.  Specific topics include feature detection, matching, and classification; visual representations and dimensionality reduction; motion detection and optical flow; image segmentation; depth perception, multi-view geometry, and 3D reconstruction; shape and surface perception; visual scene analysis and object recognition. Offered as CSDS 465 and ECSE 465.
CSDS 466	Computer Graphics	3 Units	Theory and practice of computer graphics: object and environment representation including coordinate transformations image extraction including perspective, hidden surface, and shading algorithms; and interaction.  Covers a wide range of graphic display devices and systems with emphasis in interactive shaded graphics. Offered as CSDS 366, ECSE 366, CSDS 466 and ECSE 466. Prereq: Graduate standing or Requisites Not Met permission.
CSDS 468	CyberAI: Artificial Intelligence in Cybersecurity	3 Units	This course aims to (1) explore emerging topics in cybersecurity, (2) introduce typical artificial intelligence (AI) driven techniques, and (3) apply and advance capabilities of AI to solve real-world oriented cybersecurity problems.
CSDS 473	Modern Robot Programming	3 Units	The goal of this course is to learn modern methods for building up robot capabilities using the Robot Operating System (ROS). Through a sequence of assignments, students learn how to write software to control both simulated and physical robots. Material includes: interfacing software to robot I/O; path and trajectory planning for robot arms; object identification and localization from 3-D sensing; manipulation planning; and development of graphical interfaces for supervisory robot control. Laboratory assignments are scheduled in small groups to explore implementations on specific robots.  Graduate students will also perform an independent project. Offered as CSDS 373, ECSE 373, CSDS 473 and ECSE 473.
CSDS 476	Mobile Robotics	3 Units	Design of software systems for mobile robot control, including: motion control; sensory processing; localization and mapping; mobile-robot planning and navigation; and implementation of goal-directed behaviors.  The course has a heavy lab component involving a sequence of design challenges and competitions performed in teams. Offered as CSDS 476 and ECSE 476. Prereq: CSDS 373 or CSDS 473.
CSDS 477	Advanced Algorithms	3 Units	Design and analysis of efficient algorithms, with emphasis on network flow, combinatorial optimization, and randomized algorithms. Linear programming: duality, complementary slackness, total unimodularity. Minimum cost flow: optimality conditions, algorithms, applications. Game theory: two-person zero-sum games, minimax theorems. Probabilistic analysis and randomized algorithms: examples and lower bounds. Approximation algorithms for NP-hard problems: examples, randomized rounding of linear programs. Prereq: CSDS 302 and CSDS 310 and MATH 380 and (MATH 201 or MATH 307).
CSDS 478	Computational Neuroscience	3 Units	Computer simulations and mathematical analysis of neurons and neural circuits, and the computational properties of nervous systems.  Students are taught a range of models for neurons and neural circuits, and are asked to implement and explore the computational and dynamic properties of these models.  The course introduces students to dynamical systems theory for the analysis of neurons and neural learning, models of brain systems, and their relationship to artificial and neural networks.  Term project required.  Students enrolled in MATH 478 will make arrangements with the instructor to attend additional lectures and complete additional assignments addressing mathematical topics related to the course.   Recommended preparation: MATH 223 and MATH 224 or BIOL 300 and BIOL 306. Offered as BIOL 378, COGS 378, MATH 378, BIOL 478, CSDS 478, EBME 478, ECSE 478, MATH 478 and NEUR 478.
CSDS 486	Quantum Computing, Information, and Devices	3 Units	An introduction to the math, physics, engineering, and computer science underlying the rapidly emerging fields of quantum computing, quantum information, and quantum devices. The course is taught by a group of faculty from physics, engineering, computer science, and math, and is geared towards students with diverse backgrounds and interests in these fields.  Students will select a concentration in one of these four areas, and the coursework, while still covering all topics, will be adjusted to focus on the selected area in the most detail.  Note that the listed prerequisites depend on choice of concentration.   Topics will include: 1	(Mathematics) Introduction to linear algebra, convex geometry, fundamental theory of quantum information. 2	(Physics) Introduction to the quantum mechanics of two-level systems (qubits). Survey of physics and materials for qubit technologies. 3	(Computer Science) Basic quantum gates and circuits, introduction to the theory of algorithms, survey of quantum algorithms. 4	(Engineering) Quantum architectures, mapping algorithms onto circuits.  The course consists of lectures, homework, and group projects.  Group projects will aim to synthesize the diverse backgrounds of the students and instructors to capture the interdisciplinary nature of the field. Students taking the course for graduate credit will complete an additional literature research project and presentation, in addition to enhanced problem sets. Offered as CSDS 386, CSDS 486, ECSE 386, ECSE 486, MATH 386, MATH 486, PHYS 386, and PHYS 486. Prereq: (CSDS 233 or ECSE 233) and (CSDS 281 or ECSE 281) and (MATH 201 or MATH 307) and (MATH 223 or MATH 227) and (PHYS 122 or PHYS 124).
CSDS 487	Advanced Game Development Project	3 Units	This game development project course will bring together an inter-professional group of students in the fields of engineering, computer science, and art to focus on the design and development of a complete, fully functioning computer game as an interdisciplinary team. The student teams are given complete liberty to design their own fully functional games from their original concept to a playable game published in an online marketplace. Student teams will experience the entire game development cycle as they execute their projects. Responsibilities include creating a game idea, writing a story, developing the artwork, designing characters, implementing music and sound effects, programming and testing the game, and publishing the final project. Students enrolled in 487 will develop a healthcare or education virtual environment or video game in collaboration with a mentor who has expertise in the chosen area. Offered as CSDS 390, ECSE 390, CSDS 487, and ECSE 487. Prereq: Graduate student standing.
CSDS 489	Robotics I	3 Units	Orientation and configuration coordinate transformations, forward and inverse kinematics and Newton-Euler and Lagrange-Euler dynamic analysis. Planning of manipulator trajectories. Force, position, and hybrid control of robot manipulators. Analytical techniques applied to select industrial robots. Recommended preparation: EMAE 181. Offered as CSDS 489, ECSE 489 and EMAE 489.
CSDS 490	Digital Image Processing	3 Units	Digital images are introduced as two-dimensional sampled arrays of data.  The course begins with one-to-one operations such as image addition and subtraction and image descriptors such as the histogram.  Basic filters such as the gradient and Laplacian in the spatial domain are used to enhance images.  The 2-D Fourier transform is introduced and frequency domain operations such as high and low-pass filtering are developed.  It is shown how filtering techniques can be used to remove noise and other image degradation.  The different methods of representing color images are described and fundamental concepts of color image transformations and color image processing are developed.  One or more advanced topics such as wavelets, image compression, and pattern recognition will be covered as time permits.  Programming assignments using software such as MATLAB will illustrate the application and implementation of digital image processing. Offered as CSDS 490 and ECSE 490.
CSDS 491	Artificial Intelligence: Probabilistic Graphical Models	3 Units	This course is a graduate-level introduction to Artificial Intelligence (AI), the discipline of designing intelligent systems, and focuses on probabilistic graphical models.  These models can be applied to a wide variety of settings from data analysis to machine learning to robotics.  The models allow intelligent systems to represent uncertainties in an environment or problem space in a compact way and reason intelligently in a way that makes optimal use of available information and time.  The course covers directed and undirected probabilistic graphical models, latent variable models, associated exact and approximate inference algorithms, and learning in both discrete and continuous problem spaces.  Practical applications are covered throughout the course. Prereq: CSDS 391 or Requisites Not Met permission.
CSDS 493	Software Engineering	3 Units	Topics: Introduction to software engineering; software lifecycle models; development team organization and project management; requirements analysis and specification techniques; software design techniques; programming practices; software validation techniques; software maintenance practices; software engineering ethics. Undergraduates work in teams to complete a significant software development project. Graduate students are required to complete a research project. Offered as CSDS 393, CSDS 393N, and CSDS 493. Prereq: (Computer Science Major/Minor or Data Science Major) and (CSDS 233 or ECSE 233) with a C or higher.
CSDS 494	Introduction to Information Theory	3 Units	This course is intended as an introduction to information and coding theory with emphasis on the mathematical aspects.  It is suitable for advanced undergraduate and graduate students in mathematics, applied mathematics, statistics, physics, computer science and electrical engineering.    Course content: Information measures-entropy, relative entropy, mutual information, and their properties.  Typical sets and sequences, asymptotic equipartition property, data compression.  Channel coding and capacity: channel coding theorem.  Differential entropy, Gaussian channel, Shannon-Nyquist theorem. Information theory inequalities (400 level). Additional topics, which may include compressed sensing and elements of quantum information theory. Recommended preparation: MATH 201 or MATH 307. Offered as MATH 394, CSDS 394, ECSE 394, MATH 494, CSDS 494 and ECSE 494.
CSDS 496	Artificial Intelligence: Sequential Decision Making	3 Units	This course will study the formulation and solution of decision making problems by automated agents. Topics covered include one-shot decision making (decision trees and influence diagrams),  Markov decision processes (MDPs) , automated classical and probabilistic planning, reinforcement learning (RL), hierarchical planning and RL, partially observable MDPs, Bayesian RL, collaborative multi-agent systems. Recommended preparation: CSDS 491. Prereq: CSDS 391.
CSDS 497	Artificial Intelligence: Statistical Natural Language Processing	3 Units	This course gives students an overview of the stat of the art in natural language processing. We will discuss computational aspects of language modeling  through probabilistic models, computational approaches to syntax (parsing) and semantic representations, discourse and dialog. We will study the applications of these techniques to a variety of problems including information extraction, translation and summarization. At the end of the course a student should be able to (i) understand the various statistical models and algorithms for NLP (ii) modify them as needed or design novel approaches for specific NLP tasks and (iii) understand how to evaluate the performance of these models and compare them to alternatives. Prereq: CSDS 440.
CSDS 499	Algorithmic Robotics	3 Units	This course introduces basic algorithmic techniques in robotic perception and planning.  Course is divided into two parts.  The first part introduces probabilistic modeling of robotic motion and sensing, Gaussian and nonparametric filters, and algorithms for mobile robot localization.  The second part introduces fundamental deterministic and randomized algorithms for motion planning. Offered as CSDS 499 and ECSE 499. Prereq: Graduate Standing or Requisites Not Met permission.
CSDS 500	CSDS Colloquium	0 Unit	Seminars on current topics in Computer and Data Science.
CSDS 500T	Graduate Teaching II	0 Unit	This course will provide the Ph.D. candidate with experience in teaching undergraduate or graduate students.  The experience is expected to involve direct student contact but will be based upon the specific departmental needs and teaching obligations.  This teaching experience will be conducted under the supervision of the faculty member who is responsible for the course, but the academic advisor will assess the educational plan to ensure that it provides an educational experience for the student.  Students in this course may be expected to perform one or more of the following teaching related activities: grading homeworks, quizzes, and exams, having office hours for students, running recitation sessions, providing laboratory assistance. Recommended preparation: Ph.D. student in CSDS department.
CSDS 589	Robotics II	3 Units	Survey of research issues in robotics. Force control, visual servoing, robot autonomy, on-line planning, high-speed control, man/machine interfaces, robot learning, sensory processing for real-time control. Primarily a project-based lab course in which students design real-time software executing on multi-processors to control an industrial robot. Recommended preparation: CSDS/ECSE 489. Offered as CSDS 589 and ECSE 589.
CSDS 600	Special Topics	1 - 18 Units	
CSDS 600T	Graduate Teaching III	0 Unit	This course will provide Ph.D. candidate with experience in teaching undergraduate or graduate students.  The experience is expected to involve direct student contact but will be based upon the specific departmental needs and teaching obligations.  This teaching experience will be conducted under the supervision of the faculty member who is responsible for the course, but the academic advisor will assess the educational plan to ensure that it provides an educational experience for the student.  Students in this course may be expected to perform one or more of the following teaching related activities running recitation sessions, providing laboratory assistance, developing teaching or lecture materials presenting lectures. Recommended preparation: Ph.D. student in CSES department.
CSDS 601	Independent Study	1 - 18 Units	
CSDS 620	Special Topics	1 - 18 Units	
CSDS 621	Special Projects	1 - 18 Units	
CSDS 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	Credit as arranged.
CSDS 695	Project M.S.	1 - 9 Units	Research course taken by Plan B M.S. students. Prereq: Enrolled in a Computer Science Plan B MS Program.
CSDS 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	Credit as arranged.
DANC 103	First-Year Contemporary Dance Technique I	3 Units	Introduction to contemporary dance technique, through active participation, to serve individual development of basic movement principles, locomotor and axial skills and dance vocabulary, all in relation to time, space and dynamics and with a broad spectrum of applications, including dance, music, sports and theater.  Explorations and investigations, both practical and cognitive, are designed to lay an introductory foundation for participating in and appreciating and understanding creative expressions.
DANC 104	First-Year Contemporary Dance Techniques II	3 Units	Continuation of DANC 103. Prereq: DANC 103.
DANC 121	Dance in Culture - Ethnic Forms	3 Units	A lecture class designed to introduce dance as an art form and the many roles it plays in a variety of cultures. Focus will be on ethnic forms and primal cultures. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
DANC 122	Dance in Culture - Theatrical Forms	3 Units	Introduction to an historical and cultural overview of many different theatrical forms of dance from various cultures specifically selected to encompass geographic diversity and represent different periods in history.  Basic craft elements of the structures of theatrical dance will be introduced to provide a foundation for viewing dance and developing a personal aesthetic. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
DANC 160	Introduction to Ballet Technique I	3 Units	This introductory-level course offers the beginning ballet student the basic tenets and principles of ballet technique. Classwork will involve strong emphasis on proper alignment of the body, dynamic timings, and a command of ballet terminology.
DANC 161	Introduction to Ballet Technique II	3 Units	Continuation of DANC 160. Prereq: DANC 160 or consent of department.
DANC 203	Second-Year Contemporary Dance Technique I	3 Units	Building upon the movement foundations explored in first-year contemporary dance courses, this course introduces the formalities of dance technique as a contemporary American art form with continued and progressive refinement and development of basic movement principles, locomotor and axial skills and dance vocabulary, all in relation to time, space and dynamics and with a broad spectrum of applications, including dance, music, sports and theater. Prereq: DANC 103 and DANC 104.
DANC 204	Second-Year Contemporary Dance Technique II	3 Units	Continuation of DANC 203. Prereq: DANC 203.
DANC 260	Second-Year Ballet Technique I	3 Units	In-depth exploration of principles and foundations of ballet technique as preparation for the specialized training needs of dancers. Prereq: DANC 161.
DANC 261	Second-Year Ballet Technique II	3 Units	Continuation of DANC 260. Prereq: DANC 260 or consent of department.
DANC 303	Thrid-Year Contemporary Dance Technique I	3 Units	For the dance major and upper level non-major.  Formalities of dance technique as a contemporary American art form serve as the basis of the aesthetic and technical challenges explored in the course. Prereq: DANC 204.
DANC 304	Third-Year Contemporary Dance Technique II	3 Units	Continuation of DANC 303.  Recommended preparation: DANC 303 or consent of department.
DANC 314	The Craft of Choreography	3 Units	An in-depth investigation of choreographic craft elements is presented through lecture, practical involvement and specified studies.  Emphasized are tools to discover primary movement vocabulary, development of vocabulary through permutative investigations and the co-ordering of movement vocabulary into phrases, structural units, and larger sections. Offered as DANC 314 and DANC 414. Prereq: DANC 303 and DANC 304.
DANC 315	Choreography and Music	3 Units	Combining craft resources with emphasis on use of music. Music selections, historically categorized, are chosen for the purpose of analyzing metric and structural characteristics in accord with which choreography will be created. Offered as DANC 315 and DANC 415. Prereq: DANC 314 or requisite not met permission.
DANC 317	Advanced Contemporary Dance Technique I	1 - 3 Units	Emphasis on performing skills enlarged to include rehearsal and performance of full repertory works. Adaptability, versatility, and fidelity to choreographic intention stressed. Offered as DANC 317 and DANC 417. Prereq: DANC 304
DANC 318	Advanced Contemporary Dance Technique II	1 - 3 Units	Continuation of DANC 317/417. Offered as DANC 318 and DANC 418. Prereq: DANC 317.
DANC 324	Dance Production Resources	3 Units	An examination of dance production resources such as costumes construction, lighting design, and management.  Exercises include design, construction, and implementation to emphasize practical applications. Offered as DANC 324 and DANC 424.
DANC 335	Contemporary Dance Pedagogy	3 Units	The study and investigation of the approaches and methods of teaching contemporary dance. Detailed study is made of kinesthetic, oral, and creative factors in teaching dance. Opportunity to assist and teach under supervision. Offered as DANC 335 and DANC 535. Prereq: DANC 303 and (DANC 345 or DANC 314).
DANC 345	Kinesiology for Dance and Sport Performance	3 Units	This course is an introduction to the general principles of the science of human movement focusing on musculoskeletal anatomy, physiology, and mechanics specifically pertaining to dance and sport performance. Prereq: Dance Major or PHED 332.
DANC 346	Topics in Dance Medicine, Science, and Wellness	1 - 3 Units	Review and application of continually emerging information from the fields of Dance Medicine and Science that impacts general dancer health and the care and prevention and treatment of dance specific injuries. Participation in the Dancer Wellness Program is encouraged to facilitate continued application of principles developed in DANC 345. Offered as DANC 346 and DANC 446.
DANC 355	History of Modern Dance	3 Units	Origins and development of contemporary dance in its historical context. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: 100 level first year seminar in USFS, FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY,  or FSCS.  Prereq or Coreq: FSTS 100.
DANC 360	Ballet Technique for Contemporary Dance Students I	1 - 3 Units	Ballet Technique for Dancers will focus on developing the ballet skills required of the contemporary dancer. The technical level of the class will range from intermediate to advanced where applicable in barre work as well as center.  Offered as DANC 360 and DANC 460. Prereq: DANC 261.
DANC 361	Ballet Technique for Contemporary Dance Students II	1 - 3 Units	Ballet Technique for Dancers will focus on developing the ballet skills required of the contemporary dancer.  The technical level of the class will range from intermediate to advanced where applicable in barre work as well as center. Offered as DANC 361 and DANC 461. Prereq: DANC 360.
DANC 385	Production Practicum	0 - 1 Units	Practicum for students participating in production work in the Department of Dance.  Supervised laboratory experience in technical theater, construction techniques, scenery, costumes, lighting, and props; production; ticket office operations, promotion, publicity and public relations; house management; wardrobe responsibilities; stage management; assistant directing; and other production positions.
DANC 386	Rehearsal and Performance	0 Unit	Practicum for students participating in performance in the Department of Dance, relating to the mainstage productions at Mather Dance Center.
DANC 396	SAGES Senior Capstone in Dance	3 Units	This capstone course, the final requirement of the SAGES program, is limited to students majoring in Dance.  As it is not required of the major, enrollment will be based on the recommendation of the student's major advisor.  Projects may focus on creative or scholarly research, both of which require a written component that culminates in a formal presentation.  Creative projects are only available to students who have successfully completed DANC 314, DANC 315, and DANC 324, who have also consistently excelled in their upper-level contemporary technique classes, and who have been recommended by the faculty of the Department of Dance to undertake a creative project versus a scholarly project.  Except in approved situations, all capstone projects are supervised by a faculty person in the Department of Dance. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: DANC 203, DANC 204, DANC 303, DANC 304, DANC 314 and DANC 355.
DANC 399	Independent Study in Dance	1 - 3 Units	Independent research and project work in areas of dance and pedagogy.
DANC 403	Fourth-Year Contemporary Dance Technique I	1 - 3 Units	A logical progression of contemporary technique, this class is designed for the upper level dance major and graduate student in dance to further develop technical acumen with emphasis on aesthetic and physical challenges. Prereq: DANC 303.
DANC 404	Fourth-Year Contemporary Dance Technique II	1 - 3 Units	Continuation of DANC 403. Prereq: DANC 403.
DANC 414	The Craft of Choreography	3 Units	An in-depth investigation of choreographic craft elements is presented through lecture, practical involvement and specified studies.  Emphasized are tools to discover primary movement vocabulary, development of vocabulary through permutative investigations and the co-ordering of movement vocabulary into phrases, structural units, and larger sections. Offered as DANC 314 and DANC 414.
DANC 415	Choreography and Music	3 Units	Combining craft resources with emphasis on use of music. Music selections, historically categorized, are chosen for the purpose of analyzing metric and structural characteristics in accord with which choreography will be created. Offered as DANC 315 and DANC 415. Prereq: DANC 414.
DANC 416	Choreography and Theatrical Elements	3 Units	Use of properties, costumes, and scenic elements in both "first- and second-function" (Northrop) or "literal" and "abstract" applications challenge the functional and aesthetic appropriateness of conjoined choices.  Dance structures fully developed under supervision.  Successful results may be programmed for performance and tested for applicability to the Production sequence. Prereq: DANC 414.
DANC 417	Advanced Contemporary Dance Technique I	1 - 3 Units	Emphasis on performing skills enlarged to include rehearsal and performance of full repertory works. Adaptability, versatility, and fidelity to choreographic intention stressed. Offered as DANC 317 and DANC 417. Prereq: DANC 404.
DANC 418	Advanced Contemporary Dance Technique II	1 - 3 Units	Continuation of DANC 317/417. Offered as DANC 318 and DANC 418. Prereq: DANC 417.
DANC 424	Dance Production Resources	3 Units	An examination of dance production resources such as costumes construction, lighting design, and management.  Exercises include design, construction, and implementation to emphasize practical applications. Offered as DANC 324 and DANC 424.
DANC 426	Advanced Topics in Choreography	3 Units	Introduction and investigation of advanced topics in choreography including but not limited to dance and technology, directing ensemble dance, and dance and the narrative.  This course work is explored in the format of in-studio practicum and lecture, discussion, and peer and instructor review of student generated work.  Structured studies will be developed under instructor supervision; students will be required to dedicate time and energy in the studio outside of class meetings to develop choreography studies for in-class presentation and review. Prereq: DANC 414 and DANC 415 and DANC 416.
DANC 445	Kinesiology for Dance	3 Units	Seminar and laboratory for assessment of kinesiological and biomechanical principles as related to dance. Assessment of current research will be implemented to affect cross-training protocols.
DANC 446	Topics in Dance Medicine, Science, and Wellness	1 - 3 Units	Review and application of continually emerging information from the fields of Dance Medicine and Science that impacts general dancer health and the care and prevention and treatment of dance specific injuries. Participation in the Dancer Wellness Program is encouraged to facilitate continued application of principles developed in DANC 345. Offered as DANC 346 and DANC 446.
DANC 447	Dancer Wellness Research	1 - 6 Units	This course is designed to promote research interests for those students who have had an introduction to the field of Dancer Wellness through their other coursework and/or participation in the Dancer Wellness Program annual screening and summary profiles. Prereq: DANC 446.
DANC 455	History of Modern Dance	3 Units	Origin and development of modern dance in its historical context.
DANC 460	Ballet Technique for Contemporary Dance Students I	1 - 3 Units	Ballet Technique for Dancers will focus on developing the ballet skills required of the contemporary dancer. The technical level of the class will range from intermediate to advanced where applicable in barre work as well as center.  Offered as DANC 360 and DANC 460.
DANC 461	Ballet Technique for Contemporary Dance Students II	1 - 3 Units	Ballet Technique for Dancers will focus on developing the ballet skills required of the contemporary dancer.  The technical level of the class will range from intermediate to advanced where applicable in barre work as well as center. Offered as DANC 361 and DANC 461. Prereq: DANC 460.
DANC 485	Rehearsal, Performance and Production	1 - 6 Units	(See DANC 385.)
DANC 505	Music Resources for Contemporary Dance	1 - 3 Units	Resources in the various periods and styles of music for the dancer/choreographer. Study of the choreographic use of music.
DANC 509	Introduction to Performance Theory	1 - 3 Units	This independent study oriented course is designed to acquaint the dance student with the major theoretical writings and practices of performance theory.  Areas of exploration may include anthropological, mythological, psychological, and cultural sources of art, performance, and the creative impulse.
DANC 535	Contemporary Dance Pedagogy	3 Units	The study and investigation of the approaches and methods of teaching contemporary dance. Detailed study is made of kinesthetic, oral, and creative factors in teaching dance. Opportunity to assist and teach under supervision. Offered as DANC 335 and DANC 535.
DANC 601	Special Projects	1 - 3 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
DANC 610	Professional Internship	1 - 4 Units	Involvement in intensive internships with professional dance companies, private studios, festivals, workshops or clinics to bridge the academic and professional lives. Internships may be scheduled for varying lengths of time.
DANC 640	M.F.A. Thesis Production I	3 Units	Preproduction conception in area of specialization researched and documented under appointed advisement, in accord with production syllabus, and subcommittee approval.
DANC 641	M.F.A. Thesis Production II	3 Units	Production implementation, post production evaluation/defense, and advisory assessment.
DANC 644	M.A. Project	1 - 12 Units	Research and development of a Master of Arts project in Dance.
ANAT 312	Basic Histology	3 Units	Fundamental histology course covering microscopic structure, nomenclature, and function of normal cells, tissues, and organs (human emphasis) to provide a sound foundation for bioengineering, pre-medical and pre-dental students.
ANAT 391	Embryology	3 Units	A detailed description of development will be presented, focusing mainly on the developing human. Discussions and presentations will also include several developing systems that have served as useful models in experimental embryology for deciphering mechanisms responsible for producing adult metazoan organisms. Offered as ANAT 391 and ANAT 491.
ANAT 399	Independent Study	1 - 4 Units	Laboratory research project.  Student must obtain approval of a supervising Anatomy department professor before registration and list the professor's name on the schedule card.
ANAT 401	Multimodal Human Anatomy	4 Units	This course introduces students to the gross anatomical structure of the human body using cadaver prosections and digital 3D technology, including the innovative Microsoft HoloLens. It differs from most traditional anatomy courses not only in its use of three-dimensional imaging technologies but also in its systemic rather than regional approach; the structure of the human body is learned by studying organ systems (e.g., the nervous system, the musculoskeletal system) rather than focusing on one region at a time (e.g., the thorax or the lower limb). This approach gives students the "big picture" of how the human body is organized, thereby providing a solid foundation for other courses that deal with the anatomy of the human body in greater detail. Cadaver demonstrations allow students to see anatomical systems in context and apply knowledge learned through virtual technologies. This course is presented in a blended format. Weekly one-hour framing lectures by Anatomy faculty will be pre-recorded and available for asynchronous viewing prior to the start of each week. In-person lab sessions will take place on Mondays, Wednesday, and Fridays, with one-third of the class participating in each of three activities each day: (1) a HoloAnatomy lab using the Microsoft HoloLens; (2) a student-directed seminar using Complete Anatomy and VH Dissector; and (3) a cadaver-based lab using demonstration dissections and the Anatomage Table, a tool for life-sized 3D virtual dissection. Grading is primarily based on weekly quizzes and the midterm and final exams.
ANAT 402	Human Musculoskeletal Anatomy	4 Units	This course provides an in-depth review of the structure and function of the human musculoskeletal system through lectures and cadaver-based dissections.  Topics will include a review of the connective tissues, basic biomechanics, osteology and regional and functional anatomy of the back and spine, lower limb, and upper limb.  This course will be useful for students interested in pursuing study in the areas of medicine, anatomy, bioengineering, sports medicine, orthopaedics, biological anthropology or organismal biology.
ANAT 410	Cadaver Dissection-based Human Anatomy with Histology and Physiologic Correlations	6 Units	This course will provide students with a sound understanding of the normal human body as a foundation for subsequent pursuing biomedical careers. The gross anatomy component will give a full breakdown of all gross aspects of the human body and the associated systems, while also including cadaver dissection-based laboratories. The histology component will provide students with an understanding of the structural and functional organization of the human body at the cellular and subcellular levels. The embryology component will briefly discuss the major systems and how they form within a developing embryo. This course is well-suited to all biomedical careers, including pre-clinical and biomedical undergraduates, post-baccalaureate, pre-clinical master of science graduate programs, plus medical and dental students seeking additional training in the anatomical sciences. It will meet any of the anatomy-oriented prerequisites being implemented for medical and dental school applications, including those preferring or requiring a cadaver-based experience. The assessments will include a combination of written and cadaver-based practical questions. Offered as ANAT 410 and PAST 410.
ANAT 411	Gross Anatomy	6 Units	This in-depth, regionally-oriented, cadaver dissection-based course covers all aspects of human gross anatomy. It is team-taught by Department of Anatomy faculty and is divided into six sections: thorax, abdomen, pelvis and perineum, upper limb and back, lower limb, and head and neck. Registration for both the lecture and lab components is required. Students should be prepared to devote additional time outside of class in order to master the material. The dissection lab is open 24 hours, 7 days a week to students registered for the course. Recommended preparation: introductory coursework in human anatomy or B.A./B.S. in Biology or related field.
ANAT 412	Histology and Ultrastructure	4 Units	Comprehensive functional histology course integrating microscopic identification ('structure plus nomenclature') of normal cells, tissues, and organs with aspects of their cell biology, biochemistry, and physiology ('function').  Topical coverage includes complete ('head-to-toe') tissue and organ survey with human emphasis. Offered as ANAT 412 and PATH 412.
ANAT 414	Neurological Anatomy	4 Units	This course employs a variety of teaching-learning methods--among them lectures, small-group discussions, hands-on "construction" of pathways, and brain dissection.  Regional morphology will be studied via examination of the preserved brain and of sections through the CNS; functional systems will be "followed" through the spinal cord, brain stem and/or forebrain.
ANAT 431	Statistical Methods I	3 Units	Application of statistical techniques with particular emphasis on problems in the biomedical sciences.  Basic probability theory, random variables, and distribution functions.  Point and interval estimation, regression, and correlation.  Problems whose solution involves using packaged statistical programs.  First part of year-long sequence. Offered as ANAT 431, BIOL 431, CRSP 431, PQHS 431 and MPHP 431.
ANAT 445	Mammal Diversity and Evolution	4 Units	This course focuses on the anatomical and taxonomic diversity of mammals in an evolutionary context. The emphasis is on living (extant) mammals, but extinct mammals are also discussed. By the end of the course, students will be able to: (1) describe the key anatomical and physiological features of mammals; (2) name all orders and most families of living mammals; (3) identify a mammal skull to order and family; (4) understand how to create and interpret a phylogenetic tree; (5) appreciate major historical patterns in mammal diversity and biogeography as revealed by the fossil record; (6) read and critique a scientific article dealing with mammal evolution. One weekend field trip to Cleveland Metroparks Zoo; additional individual and group visits to the Cleveland Museum of Natural History. This course satisfies a laboratory requirement for the biology major. Recommended preparation: BIOL 223 Vertebrate Biology, BIOL 225 Evolution, or BIOL 346 Human Anatomy. Offered as ANAT 445 and BIOL 345. Prereq: BIOL 214.
ANAT 462	Principles of Developmental Biology	3 Units	The descriptive and experimental aspects of animal development. Gametogenesis, fertilization, cleavage, morphogenesis, induction, differentiation, organogenesis, growth, and regeneration.  Students taking the graduate-level course will prepare an NIH-format research proposal as the required term paper. Offered as BIOL 362, BIOL 462 and ANAT 462.
ANAT 467	Topics in Evolutionary Biology	3 Units	The focus for this course on a special topic of interest in evolutionary biology will vary from one offering to the next. Examples of possible topics include theories of speciation, the evolution of language, the evolution of sex, evolution and biodiversity, molecular evolution. ANAT/ANTH/EEPS/PHIL/PHOL 467/BIOL 468 will require a longer, more sophisticated term paper, and additional class presentation. Offered as ANTH 367, BIOL 368, EEPS 367, PHIL 367, ANAT 467, ANTH 467, BIOL 468, EEPS 467, PHIL 467 and PHOL 467.
ANAT 491	Embryology	3 Units	A detailed description of development will be presented, focusing mainly on the developing human. Discussions and presentations will also include several developing systems that have served as useful models in experimental embryology for deciphering mechanisms responsible for producing adult metazoan organisms. Offered as ANAT 391 and ANAT 491.
ANAT 499	Independent Study	1 - 4 Units	Laboratory research project.  Student must obtain approval of a supervising Anatomy department professor before registration and list the professor's name on the schedule card.
ANAT 503	Readings and Discussions	1 - 3 Units	In-depth consideration of special selected topics through critical evaluation of the literature.  Student must obtain approval of supervising Anatomy department professor before registration.
ANAT 510	Anatomical Principles Surgery	3 Units	In this team-taught course, students learn how anatomic relationships and considerations affect surgical decision making. It meets once per week during the eight-week summer session, with each week focusing on a different surgical specialty, including plastic, general, vascular, neurological, urological, orthopedic, and head and neck (otolaryngology). Students build on their pre-existing knowledge of human anatomy and learn through a combination of framing lectures and cadaveric surgical simulations directed by clinical surgical faculty. Prereq: ANAT 401 or ANAT 411 or MD Student.
ANAT 515	Surgical Anatomy: Orthopaedic Musculoskeletal	4 Units	This orthopaedic musculoskeletal anatomy course is offered to M.S. in Applied Anatomy students and fourth year medical students. The course will familiarize participants with surgical approaches used to treat musculoskeletal disease. Students will learn to correlate normal and abnormal anatomical findings with radiographical studies. Recommended preparation: ANAT 411.
ANAT 516	Surgical Anatomy: Head and Neck	4 Units	This cadaver-based advanced anatomy course is offered to M.S. in Applied Anatomy students and fourth-year medical students. Students will build on their understanding of basic gross, histological, pathologic, and embryonic anatomy of the head and neck. The course will familiarize participants with surgical approaches used to treat pathological conditions of the head and neck including cranial cavity, cranial base, orbit, maxillofacial, oral, otic, pharyngeal, and airway. Students are required to attend and participate in lectures, surgical labs, and discussions in order to successfully complete the course. Prereq: ANAT 411 or Doctor of Medicine (MD) student.
ANAT 520	Imaging Anatomy	3 Units	This course is constructed to reinforce normal anatomy by imaging modalities of plain film, CT, and MRI images.  Imaging anatomy will reinforce the student's knowledge of anatomy and introduce the field of radiology.  Students would be motivated to broaden their understanding of anatomy by being exposed to the application of that knowledge.  The curriculum would introduce radiologic concepts, while stressing the normal anatomy of organ systems by imaging modalities.  Anatomical structures will be recognized by projectional and cross-sectional modalities. The student will be expected to demonstrate the anatomical characteristics of that structure, for example course, area of supply, relations, morphology, etc.   Primarily for medical and graduate students who have a comprehensive knowledge of human anatomy. We would encourage having taken ANAT 411, Gross Anatomy or Structure.
ANAT 523	Histopathology of Organ Systems	3 Units	Comprehensive course covering the underlying basic mechanisms of injury and cell death, inflammation, immunity, infection, and neoplasia followed by pathology of specific organ systems.  Material will include histological ('structure') and physiological ('function') aspects related to pathology (human emphasis). Recommended preparation: ANAT 412 or permission of instructor. Offered as ANAT 523 and PATH 523.
ANAT 560	Applied Neuroanatomy	3 Units	This course is constructed to reinforce the student's understanding of neuroanatomy. Through problem-based learning the student will set their own learning objectives based on a neurosurgical case. Presentations will use imaging, anatomic diagrams, and cadaveric dissection to demonstrate applications. Learning in this clinical context will increase motivation and understanding of this important subject. Primarily for medical students and graduate students, enrollment is by permission of instructor and completing ANAT 414, Neurological Anatomy. Prereq: ANAT 414.
ANAT 610	Oxygen and Physiological Function	1 Unit	Lecture/discussion course which explores the significance and consequences of oxygen and oxygen metabolism in living organisms. Topics to be covered include oxygen transport by blood tissues, oxygen toxicity, and mitochondrial metabolism. Emphasis will be placed on mammalian physiology with special reference to brain oxidative metabolism and blood flow as well as whole body energy expenditure and oxidative stress related to disease.  The course will cover additional spans of physiology, nutrition and anatomy. Offered as ANAT 610, NTRN 610, and PHOL 610.
ANAT 611	Practicum in Human Gross Anatomy	3 Units	A course of study designed especially for the preparation of teachers that involves the supervised practical application of previously studied theory.  The teaching experience obtained will be obtained in ANAT 411 - Human Gross Anatomy.  Teaching will be guided, supervised, and evaluated by the appropriate faculty from the department of anatomy.  The three sections of ANAT 611 and the subjects covered are: Trunk Gross Anatomy (6 weeks), Musculoskeletal Gross Anatomy (3 weeks), Head & Neck Gross Anatomy (4 weeks). Required preparation: ANAT 411 and permission of instructor.
ANAT 612	Practicum in Histology and Ultrastructure	2 Units	A course of study designed especially for the preparation of teachers that involves the supervised practical application of previously studied theory.  The prerequisite knowledge required for ANAT 612 must have been obtained previously in ANAT 412: Histology and Ultrastructure and the associated laboratory ANAT 413: Histology Laboratory.  Required participation in ANAT 612 is defined as: 1. Meet weekly with course instructor to (pre)review course material; 2. Attend all ANAT 412 lectures; 3. Participate/assist in all ANAT 413 laboratory sessions.  Teaching will be guided, supervised, and evaluated by the course instructor with reference to the graduate student's overall progress and performance as a teacher.  Required prerequisites: 'A' grades on ANAT 412 and ANAT 413; permission of instructor required.
ANAT 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 9 Units	Master's Thesis Plan A.
DPHC 501	Principals of Oral Epidemiology and Research Methods	2 Units	This course will address the distribution and determinants of oral and dental diseases at the local, state, national and international levels.  Students will be instructed on the application of various dental indexes.  Survey research methodology including questionnaire, development, and different forms of validity are also some of the topics taught.  The course will enable residents to identify and formulate a research question that will be developed into a research proposal, to fulfill their residency requirement.
DPHC 505	Communication Methods in Dental Public Health	2 Units	This course will prepare students to be adept in searching scientific literature and gain/augment their skills in communicating as public health professionals.  This skill set includes preparing literature reviews, manuscripts, developing research proposal and for this purpose students will gain proficiency in relevant software such as Reference Manager/EndNote/Adobe Connect.  Students will be familiar with the different elements of a research proposal and gain skills in writing these components
DPHC 507	Data Analysis and Reporting	2 Units	Data Analysis and report writing will prepare residents to be proficient in analyzing public health/epidemiological by instructing them on the appropriate use of univariate, bivariate, and multivariate statistical test.  Students will use either primary or secondary data sets for such applications.  Bases on their previously approved research proposal and the results of the data analysis residents will write a scientific report to fulfill one of the requirements of the residency program.
DPHC 508	Dental Public Health Administration	2 Units	This course describes the history of dental public health, its principles, and the discipline as a recognized dental specialty.  Understanding the discipline/profession and administration at local, state, national, and international levels will enable the graduates to be effective public health administrators.
DPHC 530	Graduate Preventive Dentistry	2 Units	This course will address primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention methods to prevent oral and dental diseases with the particular focus on groups of people rather than individual patients.  Instruction on cost-effectiveness of different preventive modalities will enable students to choose the applicable program for specific populations.
DPHC 532	Oral Health Care Systems	2 Units	The course on oral health care systems will provide an insight into the dental care systems in the U.S. including different forms of financing, private, public, etc.  Knowledge of the system will enable future dental public health professionals to recognize the oral health workforce models and their appropriateness to public health settings to provide dental care to various groups.
DPHC 551	Research in Dental Public Health I	1.5 Unit	One of the core aspects of dental public health training at CWRU is to augment residents' research skills; each resident will be required to develop, implement, and complete at least one research project during the training.  The project may involve primary data collection or the use of secondary data for analysis.  The program director, members of the residency committee, and experts working in the area of each resident's interest will assist with the selection of an appropriate research topic and getting IRB approval.  Following the data analysis, each resident will submit and defend a written report of the project.  Acquisition of research skills will be facilitated by didactic courses and periodical meetings with the residency director and members of the residency committee.
DPHC 552	Research in Dental Public Health II	1.5 Unit	One of the core aspects of dental public health training at CWRU is to augment residents' research skills; each resident will be required to develop, implement, and complete at least one research project during the training.  The project may involve primary data collection or the use of secondary data for analysis.  The program director, members of the residency committee, and experts working in the area of each resident's interest will assist with the selection of an appropriate research topic and getting IRB approval.  Following the data analysis, each resident will submit and defend a written report of the project.  Acquisition of research skills will be facilitated by didactic courses and periodical meetings with the residency director and members of the residency committee.
DPHC 555	Dental Public Health Practicum I	1.5 Unit	Supervised field experience is an integral part of the advanced education program in dental public health at CWRU; the numerous field experiences are designed to augment residents' requisite public health skills as well as community-oriented primary care.  The sites for field experience include Medina County Health Department, Akron Health Resources Inc., Free Medical Clinic of Greater Cleveland, etc.  These sites have been carefully chosen for DPH residents to improve public health skills, which would enable them to succeed as a dental public health professional.
DPHC 556	Dental Public Health Practicum II	1.5 Unit	Supervised field experience is an integral part of the advanced education program in dental public health at CWRU; the numerous field experiences are designed to augment residents' requisite public health skills as well as community-oriented primary care.  The sites for field experience include Medina County Health Department, Akron Health Resources Inc., Free Medical Clinic of Greater Cleveland, etc.  These sites have been carefully chosen for DPH residents to improve public health skills, which would enable them to succeed as a dental public health professional.
DPHC 599	Independent Study in Dental Public Health	1 - 9 Units	The aim of this course is for dental public health residents to gain an in-depth understanding of selected topics in public health and/or augment their skills in epidemiological research methodology.  Students will choose their topic(s) of interest in consultation with the course director and attain the requisite skill levels through assigned readings and written assignments.  Students opting to augmenting their research skills will be required to complete a research project by developing and implementing the project followed by data analysis and writing a report.
DENT 501	Biological Aspects of the Stomatological System	0 - 2 Units	This course is a review of biochemistry, molecular and cellular biology, histology, and oral anatomy and an expansion of oral biological topics that underlie the disciplines of endodontics, orthodontics, periodontics, and pediatric dentistry.
DENT 502	Correlative Medical Science	0 - 2 Units	Case-based discussion of selected systemic disease commonly encountered by the dentist.
DENT 503	Facial Growth and Development	0 - 1 Units	Emphasis on the qualitative, quantitative, and integrative changes during postnatal craniofacial growth and development.
DENT 504	Advanced Facial Growth	1 Unit	Student participation in seminar evaluation series dealing with problems and controversies apparent in the literature in regard to theories of growth, development, and aging. Emphasis on the craniofacial literature, but not exclusively.
DENT 505	Dentofacial Anomalies	0 - 1 Units	This course is designed to provide the student with the practical experience regarding the multidisciplinary aspects of diagnosis and treatment of patients with craniofacial anomalies. Observation of team sessions and active participation in patient examinations, diagnosis, and treatment planning.
DENT 507	Dental Ethics for the Graduate	0 - 1 Units	This 8 week course is given in group discussion format.  Topics of ethical dilemmas, informed consent, professional (both national and local) codes of ethics, IRB introduction, patient autonomy, contractual obligations and purrery are discussed using case scenarios and student presentations.
DENT 509	Temporomandibular Disorders, Orofacial Pain and Sleep Disorders	0 - 3 Units	This course will enable first year dental residents to learn the principles of pain mechanisms, types of OFP and Sleep Disorders, differential diagnosis and management of these conditions in adults and children.  By the end of this course the residents should be able to identify the most common types of OFP and sleep disorders, be able to make the differential diagnosis, and manage simple OFP case and / or refer the most complex OFP cases. Recommended preparation: DMD, DDS or equivalent degree.
DENT 510	Epidemiology and Biostatistics	0 - 3 Units	A detailed presentation of epidemiological and biostatistical techniques designed to acquaint the student with a broad spectrum of scientific approaches and to prepare for a research project. Topics include design of observational and experimental studies, common biostatistical techniques encountered in the dental literature such as t-test, ANOVA, chi-square, correlation and regression, and assessing the validity of diagnostic tests. Instruction includes lectures, critique of selected literature and computer analysis of data.
DENT 511	Biostatistics	0 - 3 Units	Biostatistics topics include: types of data, probability concepts and distribution, sampling, hypothesis testing, correlation and regression.
DENT 512	Advanced Oral Pathology	0 - 3 Units	Lectures and seminars on the clinical and histopathologic characteristics of many of the common oral diseases. Special emphasis on developing a logical approach to clinical and histopathologic diagnosis. Participation is expected for in-class discussion of the clinical and histopathologic material presented.
DENT 513	Anatomy of the Head and Neck	0 - 3 Units	This course deals with the structural, functional, and clinical relationships of the many organs and organ systems which comprise the head, neck, and pharyngeal regions of the human body.
DENT 514	Research Methods: Preparation	0 - 1 Units	The goal of this course is to facilitate a formal statement of the student's research idea as preparation for working with a thesis committee or undertaking independent research.
DENT 516	Microbiology, Immunology, and Immune Systems	0 - 3 Units	This course reviews bacterial structure and classification, provides insight into oral bacterial pathogenesis. Principles of antibiotic use and mechanisms of resistance are reviewed. Microbial diagnostic methodologies are discussed. Integration of periodontics, endodontics, and pediatric dentistry is stressed as it relates to the inflammatory process in the human host.
DENT 518	Behavioral Considerations in Oral Health Care	0 - 1 Units	This course focuses on the behavioral knowledge and skills the oral health practitioner must possess in order to deliver effective, patient-centered care. Specifically, the course is designed to enhance graduate students' existing knowledge and skills in relation to dentist-patient communication, management of diverse patient populations, and patient education and facilitation of health behavior change.
DENT 520	Skeletal Anchorage	.5 Unit	This course provides 1st year orthodontic residents with the theoretical knowledge and practical skills necessary to successfully treat orthodontic patients in need of absolute anchorage with orthodontic mini-implants.  In addition, the most current articles in the orthodontic literature pertaining to this topic are read and discussed.  The theory will be supplemented by practical exercises as necessary.
DENT 521	Manot Cave Dig, Israel	0 - 1 Units	This project is an ongoing collaboration between the CWRU School of Dental Medicine and Tel Aviv University. The newly discovered excavations have produced thousands of butchered deer bones, hundreds of stone tools, an one partial human skull.  Traditionally CWRU faculty and students will be going in July to continue their work. Interested students are given the opportunity to learn basic archeological techniques while working in a newly discovered cave in Northern Israel. The Manot cave was discovered in 2008 and after 6 field seasons has yielded thousands of artifacts shedding light on what life was like for our early ancestors.  Each participant will rotate through several stations including wet and dry sieving, excavation, and how to pick through the processed remains.  They will learn how to identify stone and bone tools, faunal and floral remains. In addition to the hands-on experience they also get to attend field lectures by some of the world's most famous researchers in human prehistory. Lodging is in comfortable cabins within easy walking distance from the cave site.  This two-week field and lab experience is not only educational but also presents the opportunity to travel around the beautiful country of Israel.
DENT 550	Clinical Pharmacology	0 - 1 Units	This course is designed to enable residents to obtain an understanding of the pharmacology of the most commonly prescribed medications; pharmacotherapeutic concepts in relationship to disease pathophysiology; rational drug therapy in the treatment of disease; drug-drug interactions and drug-disease interactions; adverse drug events. Residents will be expected to apply information on disease pathophysiology and pharmacotherapy to clinical cases. The ultimate goal is to provide relevant information to assist clinicians in practice.
DENT 555	Management of Medical Emergencies	0 - 1 Units	This course covers the diagnosis and management of common medical emergencies, with special emphasis on patient evaluation and history taking to prevent such emergencies in the dental office. Venipuncture technique and the use of emergency equipment are demonstrated. Also included is a basic course in cardiopulmonary resuscitation, with practical demonstrations and examinations that lead to certification in basic CPR.
DENT 561	Orthodontics for Pediatric Dentists I	0 - 3 Units	The course is designed to familiarize the pediatric dentistry residents with (1) the clinical evaluation of patients to determine appropriateness of orthodontic intervention, (2) record taking, (3) diagnosis, (4) treatment planning of cases in the mixed and permanent dentition, (5) treatment administration and (6) retention strategies. The primary focus will be on interceptive orthodontics including growth modification and corrective orthodontics in the permanent dentition. First in a series of four courses.
DENT 564	Advanced Principles of Occlusion	1 Unit	This course is designed to provide in-depth knowledge of the structure and function of all anatomic components involved in occlusion, biomechanics of articulation and mastication; recording of mastication patterns; diagnosis of occlusal dysfunction; relationship to neuromuscular and temporomandibular joint anatomy and pathology; evidence based therapy used in the management of occlusal and temporomandibular disorders and its significance to inflammatory periodontal disease.
DENT 565	Practice Management I (Ortho)	0 - 1 Units	Seminar and demonstration course designed to prepare the student for all phases of the "business" of orthodontics as well as the responsibility of being a "professional." Management of the department clinic, private practice management, office visitations, and the business community, and ethics through the use of guest speakers on jurisprudence, personal and professional insurance, accounting, estate planning, risk management, informed consent, banking, office design, organized dentistry and investments.  First in a series of four courses.
DENT 569	Orthodontic Literature Review I	1 Unit	The course will focus on contemporary and classic literature selected to cover a wide range of orthodontic topics. The selected literature includes the reading list suggested by the American Board of Orthodontics in preparation for the Part II of the ABO examination. Students will be required to discuss the articles and answer questions pertaining to the reviewed material.
DENT 572	Pre-Clinical Principles in Orthodontics	0 - 1 Units	This course is comprised of a series of seminars presented by orthodontic faculty covering topics that will prepare the first orthodontic resident for the initial phases of clinical training.
DENT 573	Advanced Specialty Principles: Clinical I	2 Units	Full fixed orthodontic appliance treatment of patients in an educational setting. First in a series of four courses.
DENT 580	Orthodontics-Oral Surgery Conference	0 - 1 Units	A seminar series involving a multidisciplinary approach to the treatment of patients with severe craniofacial deformities. Begins in the fall of each year (continuing for four semesters) with a series of lectures, followed by assignment of patients supervised jointly by the departments of orthodontics and oral surgery. Meetings held bimonthly to review patient progress, plan treatment, and present cases for discussion. Each student involved in all phases of treatment: presurgical orthodontics, the surgical procedure, finishing orthodontics, and retention.
DENT 583	Orthodontic Diagnostic Seminar I	1 Unit	Series of lectures and seminars covering the science of orthodontic diagnosis. Course consists of lectures on techniques of diagnosis, treatment planning, and critique of cases from the department or from faculty private practices. Content also includes long-term follow-up of post retention cases. First in a series of three courses.
DENT 585	Orthodontic Diagnostic Seminar III	1 Unit	Third in a series of three courses. (See DENT 583.)
DENT 586	Limited Tooth Movement for the Dental Specialist	0 - 1 Units	A review of the rationale for orthodontic treatment in periodontally diseased patients and in pre-restorative dentitions. Lectures, audio-visual programs, and technique sessions. Diagnosis, treatment planning, and various methods of tooth movement.
DENT 587	Periodontal Prosthesis	1 Unit	This course examines and defines the periodontal prosthetic interrelationships beginning with treatment planning and continuing with discussing the utilization of the combined treatment modalities. It focuses on provisionalization, furcation treatment, occlusion, aesthetics, removable appliances, and special advanced treatment problems.
DENT 651	Thesis M.S.D.	1 - 9 Units	Subsections for each program area of study: endodontics, orthodontics, periodontics, or pediatric dentistry.
DENT 661	Conscious IV Sedation I	2 Units	Didactic portion covers physical evaluation, physiology, pharmacology, emergencies, and techniques. Cardiac monitoring, basic life support, and advanced cardiac life support.
DENT 662	Conscious IV Sedation II	0 - 6 Units	(See DENT 661.) Supervised clinical experience in conscious IV sedation.
DENT 663	Implant Dentistry I Periodontics	0 - 1 Units	Designed to enhance the understanding of current concepts and their role in the multidisciplinary treatment of the patient.
DENT 664	Implant Dentistry II Periodontics	0 - 6 Units	(See DENT 663.) Clinical demonstration, participation, and case presentation in implant dentistry.
DENT 682	Cephalometrics	0 - 1 Units	A lecture and laboratory course in cephalometric roentgenography leading to a thorough understanding of craniofacial radiographic techniques. Use of x-rays and radiation hygiene, and technical and interpretive proficiency.
DENT 683	Imaging and IT	1 Unit	This course is designed to give some basic computer knowledge and prepare the resident for the use of computers in the orthodontic office.
DENT 684	Radiology and Cephalometrics	1 Unit	Fundamentally related to cephalometric radiography, skeletal morphology, and cephalogram interpretations of historic analyses via the Krogman-Sassouni Syllabus. Also, clinical evaluations of hard and soft tissue relationships of the airway and skeletal maturation are presented. The use of Bolton Standards in craniofacial analysis is stressed.
DENT 693	Fellowship of Advanced Clinical Education - Advanced Dental Studies	1 - 9 Units	Fellowship of Advanced Clinical Education (or F.A.C.E.) - Advanced Dental Studies is a special course per agreement in collaboration with Qassim University in Saudi Arabia.
DENT 696	Advanced Dental Training	0 - 6 Units	This course is a one year advanced training in dental medicine at Case Western Reserve University School of Dental Medicine.  Responsibilities may include clinical and didactic responsibilities.  The course is designed to give students clinical experience in a defined focus area.
DENT 697	Advanced Dental Training II	1 Unit	Continuation of Advanced Dental Training I. Prereq: D.D.S. or equivalent.
DENT 698	Multidisciplinary Seminar	0 - .5 Units	This seminar meets monthly to discuss multidisciplinary cases to develop treatment recommendations for the patients presented.  Each graduate department selects a clinical case that requires the services of at least three dental specialties.  Ideally, patients should be in the beginning stage of treatment planning so the input from the various specialties can be used to develop a comprehensive plan to establish a healthy oral environment.  It is expected that several alternative treatments will be discussed and the relative merits of each approach evaluated.  To maximize the benefit of this seminar to the student learning process, an attending faculty member should be present from each of the dental specialty programs.  In addition, all seminars have a Prosthodontist to provide input on the restorative treatment options.
DENT 699	AEGD Residency Training	1 - 8 Units	This is a multidisciplinary course that encompasses didactic and clinical training in general dentistry.
DESN 210	Introduction to Programming for Business Applications	3 Units	Goals: This course will introduce students to the basics of programming logic utilizing the Python programming language and environment. The course will help students understand how to apply programming solutions and related algorithmic thinking to solve common business and decision problems. This class is a great introduction into programming logic, it just happens to use Python. This course will teach the fundamentals of programming logic, which could be applied to any programming language available today or into the future. Learning Objectives:  Upon completion of this course students should have a foundational knowledge of how to use variables, operators, manipulate strings, loops, functions, and basic array manipulation all through Python programming language.  The course will culminate with a final project where students will be divided into groups with each group solving a different small business problem. The final submission will require a joint white paper submission that demonstrates the following learned objectives: problem research, scope, architect, and design a potential solution using python environment. A sample of the implemented Python code that was used to solve this problem will be required for final submission. Course Requirements: Each student must have access to a computer that can be brought to class. No programming experience is required. Downloading and installing Python is covered at the start of the course. Basic computer skills: surfing websites, running programs, saving and opening documents, etc. Offered as BTEC 420 and DESN 210.
DESN 302	Creativity in Design & Business: Sources of Perception, Imagination, & Creative Thinking	3 Units	The goal of this course is to develop skills and techniques for creative problem solving. The course is for anyone interested in design, the development of new products and services, and strategies for change in organizations and society. It is useful wherever we face challenging situations that require imagination, new ideas, and innovative approaches in a rapidly changing world. At its core, creativity is an issue of perception. Learning to change one's perception from what is known, comfortable, and familiar to what is unknown and potentially valuable and rewarding is the challenge of this course. We will explore a wide variety of methods, techniques, and tools for encouraging new perceptions. There will be useful readings, but also exercises and projects for individuals and teams to develop new strategies of creative thinking. Offered as DESN 302 and ENTP 302.
DESN 308	Business Model Design and Innovation	3 Units	This course takes the perspective of entrepreneurs or business unit managers. The three basic questions that all entrepreneurs and intrepreneurs must answer is where to play, how to win and what to do.  You have identified a group of customers for your product or service (where to play).  Your first challenge is to know what features (Customer Attributes) your target customer will pay for. Innovative business models focus on a set of customer attributes that are usually very different from other industry incumbents that we call Focal Attributes. Your second challenge is to clearly state your profit logic -- how you will make money -- how to win.  The concept called Profit Objectives (similar but not the same as KPI and/or SMART objectives) allow you to operationalize the profit logic through specific and measurable deliverables.   Your third challenge is building the value chain that can deliver these focal attributes (what to do).  At this point, you have a good understanding of all the elements of your business model and in particular, how the focal attributes and the value chain align with the profit objectives. You will learn how to illustrate this alignment through a mapping process. Offered as DESN 308 and ENTP 308. Prereq: Junior standing or higher.
DESN 310	Systems Analysis and Design (SAD)	3 Units	This course begins with business analysis and ends with information systems design. Students are introduced to tools and techniques enabling effective analysis, design and documentation of an information system application. The student learns methodologies that form the basis of systems design and engineering practices. Models that focus on the articulation of business functions, integrating process, data and behavioral abstraction form the core of formal methods in systems development using the Unified Modeling Language (UML). The course teaches students principles and skills that are essential to their function as system developers, participants and leaders of system development projects. Prereq: MIDS 301 and (ENGR 131 or CSDS 132 or DESN 210).
DESN 320	Database Management	3 Units	This course is a comprehensive introduction to data management in organizations. It establishes the data management foundation in the business major and can be taken as a course for students in data analytics. Topics include conceptual and logical data modeling, entity relationship and relational data modeling, and database design and implementation using the SQL programming language. Students will also be introduced with non relational data bases and big data applications. Students will complete exercises in database modeling, design and  databased programming using SQL on a given data base environment to be determined later (Oracle, Open SQL etc). Prereq: ACCT 100 and (ENGR 131 or CSDS 132 or DESN 210).
DESN 410	Leading Digital Innovation by Design	3 Units	A new wave of digital revolution is transforming every industrial sector. Powered by increasingly smaller yet potent microprocessors and sensors, a new generation of analytical tools, and ubiquitous wearable and mobile devices, companies can radically transform the way they interact with users and the way they create and capture value. Technology like Block Chain and AI are likely to fundamentally reshape how we think about firms and industries. Such changes make existing strategic frameworks and tools obsolete. In order to understand how and why digital technology changes the industrial landscape, companies must understand some of the fundamental characteristics of digital technology and how it demands new types of value creation logic.   Be it a large corporation or a small start-up; or a government agency or a multinational enterprise; everyone is struggling to deal with the new digital reality. Yet, exactly how to use digital technology to create value is not clear. While all companies must understand how digital technology is fundamentally different from other forms of technology, ironically digital innovation is not about technology. Digital innovation is making digital technology meaningful and value to users. Therefore, digital innovation requires us to truly understand us (people), what we do, why we do what we do, what makes us happy, and what we consider meaningful. Therefore, digital innovation is a deeply humanistic exploration to make digital technology meaningful and valuable to us.   In order to fully harness the transformative capacity of digital technology, we must gain deeper insights on people and their actions, meanings and values. In this experiential course, we use design as the primary tool to gain such humanistic insights, and work with real-world projects to apply those ideas and tools to build real digital innovations.
DESN 419	Entrepreneurship and The Good Life	3 Units	Entrepreneurship and business ownership is how most wealth is created. Pursuing the "Good Life", when done effectively, leads to wealth and fulfillment. Wealth, like happiness & fulfillment, is not to be pursued directly, it ensues as a result of living a life of positive impact for others. We will explore two primary entrepreneurial strategies used to create value for others, Entrepreneurship Through Acquisition and Real Estate as attractive alternatives to Startups (traditionally equated with "entrepreneurship").  We will explore these topics with real entrepreneur guests who will share their experience and strategies with the class.  This course employs an active learning approach, based on the belief that the best way to learn is through a progression of real world insights rather than a list of policies and practices delivered via long lectures. Offered as DESN 419 and IIME 419.
DESN 425	Chief Executive Officer	3 Units	This course will take the perspective of the CEO in deciding the actions that lead to sustainable competitive advantage.  We will study decisions that span from starting a small business to expanding beyond the core using mergers and acquisitions.  We will also study how CEOs decide to exit a market.  The successful CEO not only has to design the strategy for success but has to also design an execution plan.  As the organization grows the importance of delegation to the right subordinates becomes increasingly critical.  The course material includes case studies, decision briefs and presentations (virtual and in person) by senior executives.  Decision briefs are short notes that have the same information that the CEOs had when starting the business.  You will develop the strategy based on these decision briefs and will compare your suggestions to what was actually done by both successful and unsuccessful CEOs. Offered as DESN 425 and IIME 424.
DESN 440	Design of Disruptive Business Models	3 Units	This course will explore the design of business models that disrupt traditional or established business patterns.  With the shift toward services and human interactions as the foundation of many new companies, this course will focus on methods of inventing and developing business models that use digital technology, information, and service concepts to meet new needs in areas of retail, medical care, and other areas of business opportunity.
DESN 490	Business Model Innovation	3 Units	We will take the perspective of the business unit or an entrepreneur starting a business.  The course will be built around defining the following as problems.  Where to play, how to win and what to do.  We will deconstruct many innovative business models.  However, the learning objective for you is to understand a process by which you can design (reconstruct) similar innovative business models.  The process of identifying a creative outcome is essentially a search task, equivalent to find valuable treasures in an unexplored space. One can find treasure by walking around randomly or following a well thought out search algorithm. The latter, however, is much more efficient, guarantees much higher payoff in the long term, and can be learned and replicated by any willing explorers. Example in Fossil Hunting.
DESN 494	Managerial Consultancy	3 Units	Students will learn to match consulting methodologies with client needs and employ a step by step strategy development process applied to actual companies which are semester-long clients of the class. Accelerated career strategies in the consultancy business are featured as well as tactics for getting hired in the first place. The course views consultancy as a role rather than career and conceptualizes consultancy as a process of optimizing an organization's value creation potential and competitive advantage. Students should be able to apply the concepts regardless of career choice. Exposure to senior practicing consultants is featured.
DESN 501	Special Problems and Topics	1 - 18 Units	This course is offered, with permission, to students undertaking reading in a field of special interest.
DESN 527	Seminar in DESN	3 Units	This seminar addresses topics of current interest with a strong emphasis on research. It is intended primarily for the faculty and doctoral students of the DESN Department.
DESN 601	Special Topics in MIS	1 - 18 Units	This course is offered, with permission, to Ph.D. candidates undertaking reading in a field of special interest.
DESN 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
DSRE 335	Clinical Pharmacology	1.5 Unit	This course is designed to review general principles of pharmacology, provide evidence-based information on the therapeutic application of agents prescribed by oral healthcare providers and discuss the rationale for and clinical implications of other therapeutic agents prescribed to patients by other healthcare providers. Emphasis is placed on critical thinking in discussing the reciprocal influences of drug, patient, and procedure-related variable.
DSRE 370	Principles of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery II	1 Unit	This course is structured to help the student acquire a basic understanding of the advanced aspects of the specialty of oral and maxillofacial surgery and includes the process of diagnosis, surgical and adjunctive management of diseases, deformities and malformations of the oral cavity,  jaws and associated structures.
DSRE 374	Fixed Prosthodontics	1 Unit	The didactic portion of the course describes further development of principles and clinical applications introduced in REHE 259/260, Basic Procedures in Fixed Prosthodontics, with emphasis on diagnosis, treatment planning, clinical and laboratory procedures in fixed prosthodontics. Discussion and comprehensive overview of fundamentals and advanced methods of restoring function and esthetics for partially edentulous patients with fixed prostheses.
DSRE 391	Endodontics	1 Unit	The didactic curriculum provides the major endodontic treatment information for this program. Specific subjects covered are diagnosis, pulp and periapical pathosis, radiology, pharmacology, anesthesia, pain management, emergency treatment, pulp treatment, trauma, mechanical innovations, apexification, bleaching, endodontic-periodontal complexities, preparation of endodontically treated teeth, and endodontic surgery, tooth-difficulty assessment and evidence based endodontics. The above information is designed to provide the student with a basic understanding of the field of endodontics.
DSRE 392	Nitrous Oxide and Conscious Sedation	.5 Unit	This course consists of lectures and inter-student nitrous oxide administration for the undergraduate dental student to become informed and trained in the safe and effective use of nitrous oxide-oxygen inhalation light conscious sedation. The student will also learn the pharmacology and clinical application of agents used for intravenous light and moderate conscious sedation in the control of pain and anxiety in dentistry.
DSRE 393	Principles of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery I	1 Unit	This didactic curriculum introduces the basic concepts of minor oral surgery relevant to the general dentist and also provides discussion on the following topics; medications used in oral surgery, management of the hospitalized patient, management of simple and complex odontogenic infections, management of complications in oral surgery, principles of diagnosis and treatment of facial trauma, and biopsy techniques in oral surgery.
DSRE 395	Introduction to Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery	.5 Unit	This didactic course is designed to prepare the student for oral surgery clinical rotations and is comprised of the following topics, review of local anesthesia, review of applied anatomy, infection control, patient assessment and case presentation, informed consent, oral surgical armamentarium, and principles of exodontia.
DSRE 396	Temporomandibular Disorders and Occlusion	2 Units	The didactic portion of the course describes anatomy, biomechanics, and the maintenance of, the pathology associated with and the restoration of the masticatory or stomatognathic system. It includes Temporomandibular Disorder and other types of Orofacial Pains such as Primary Headache Disorders, Neuropathic Orofacial Pain, Psychogenic Pain, and Dental Sleep Medicine.
DSPR 136	Cariology	1 Unit	This course in cariology includes development, distribution and determinants, role of fluorides, clinical features, risk assessment, and prevention of caries. The course will enable students to understand the etiology, patho-physiology, and clinical aspects of caries, which will complement the Problem-Based-Learning module, Epidemiology for Clinical Dentistry. In addition, this course will prepare the first-year students for their sealant rotation where they will be observing clinical features of caries in children before placing sealants on appropriate teeth.
DSPR 139	Neoplasia and Genetics	1 Unit	Neoplasia and its sequelae are a major healthcare problem in the United States and across the world. I would like dental practitioners and students to have a thorough understanding of and to be articulate in describing the aspects of neoplastic disease, ranging from theory to clinical impact. This understanding rests on familiarity with basic principles of genetics which increasingly is recognized to be implicated in the pathophysiology, diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of a variety of diseases not limited to neoplasia. Such knowledge is essential in being able to: confidently and compassionately manage patients; speak comfortably with colleagues in other medical specialties; entertain the possibility of neoplastic disease in the appropriate clinical scenario.
DSPR 232	Periodontics	1 Unit	The second-year course in periodontology focuses on the application of basic principles of periodontology in diagnosis and treatment of periodontal disease. Emphasis is placed on development of clinical skills and diagnosis of periodontal disease in the first half of the course, ending with informal discussion of actual cases. Pre-surgical treatment planning is introduced in the second half of the course to prepare for the third year.
DSPR 234	Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology	3 Units	The practice of dentistry includes a routine 90-second head and neck exam on all new patients as well as the proper identification and management any and all abnormalities of the oral cavity, salivary glands and jaw bones. In order to confidently and compassionately provide comprehensive care to the dental patient, the dentist must be aware of and qualified in managing diseases native to the oral and maxillofacial regions and systemic or dermatologic diseases with oral and maxillofacial manifestations. Many systemic conditions with oral and maxillofacial manifestations have been taught in your general pathology lectures and will at most be mentioned in passing due to time constraints. You will be introduced to approximately 300 diseases in this course. I want all of you to succeed in this challenging course. Success entails recognizing that oral and maxillofacial pathology is best thought of as a foreign language, and must be learned, practiced and rehearsed as such to achieve mastery and confidence.
DSPR 239	Neoplasia	1 Unit	Topics covered in this educational module include tumor nomenclature, features of benign versus malignant tumors, cytologic characteristics of cancer cells, pathogenesis and prognosis
DSPR 333	Management of Medical Emergencies	.5 Unit	The purpose of this course is to comprehensively review the recognition and management of common medical emergency situations that a dentist is likely to encounter in the dental office.
DSPR 341	Oral Diagnosis and Radiology	2 Units	The didactic curriculum is aimed at helping the beginning clinician (student) to develop and understand the diagnostic process. It is designed to present to the student a method, a process, by which the common oral problems facing the dental practitioner can be recognized, diagnosed, evaluated and managed.
DSPR 342	Oral Cancer Diagnosis	1 Unit	Cancer is a major health problem in the United States and accounts for a significant utilization of health care and research resources.  Dentists have professional, ethical and legal responsibilities to recognize the signs and symptoms of oral cancer and render a prompt and accurate diagnosis.  Patients with oral cancer have complex treatment needs and the dentist can have a positive impact on the quality of life of such patients. Students of dental medicine should understand the many facets of oral cancer so that they might be able to make a positive contribution to the well being of their patients, especially for those who will develop oral cancer.
DSPR 344	Principles of Medicine	.5 Unit	The didactic curriculum provides a general background and discussion of the risk assessment of medical conditions in an ever-increasing aging population.  Within the setting of out-patient care, as well as those that are hospitalized, patients often present for dental procedures with co-existing medical systemic illness that provide an added challenge to the dental provider.  Management of these medical problems within the context of dentistry and medicine will be covered.
DBAP 611	Theory and Practice of Collective Action	3 Units	The ability of autonomous and interdependent parties to coordinate actions, or to act cooperatively, affects a wide range of organizational and social problems. This course addresses the theory and practice of collective action in local, national and global contexts.  Case studies of collective action problems, such as environmental protection, community revitalization, and the mobilization of interest groups will be discussed. Offered as DBAP 611 and EDMP 611. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Doctor of Business Administration Program.
DBAP 613	Leading Change	3 Units	Change is an enigma and yet sustained, desirable change (SDC) drives adaptation, growth and life itself.  In this course, we will continuously attempt to answer two questions: What is the process of sustained, desirable change?  and What is the role of a leader?  Concepts from complexity theory will be used, including understanding the multilevel nature of SDC at the individual, dyad,  team, organization, community, country, and global levels.  Intentional Change Theory (ICT) will be used as the organizing concept for the changes studied.  Leadership and its development will be examined by studying a number of topics and applying them to three major case studies: (1) yourself; (2) practice coaching with compassion; and (3) a major change project.  This course will explore questions, such as: Who are effective leaders?  How do they think and act?  What makes us want to follow them?  How are leaders developed?  What is the role of emotional and social intelligence?  How does a leader's mind, body, heart, and spirit affect their performance? Offered as DBAP 613 and EDMP 613. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Doctor of Business Administration Program.
DBAP 614	Business as an Evolving Complex System	3 Units	The goal of this course is to provide a foundation for understanding how business systems evolve, why the business systems in the major advanced countries have evolved differently over the last 100 years or so, and what the underlying driving forces are.  The focus is on transformation rather than economic growth.  The course examines the evolution of business systems as a result of technological and organizational change.  It deals with the role of history, culture and finance in generating business organizations in various countries.  The course also studies the emergence of regional innovation systems and industry clusters, as well as how digitization and globalization are changing the "industrial logic." Offered as DBAP 614 and EDMP 614. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Doctor of Business Administration Program.
DBAP 616	Global Economic Systems and Issues	3 Units	This course provides a framework and analytical tools for understanding globalization and international economic relations in the context of the global political system.  It analyzes the economic and political forces that are shaping global cooperation on economic matters, the role and impact of international economic institutions such as the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Trade Organization, and evolving forms of regional governance, such as the European Union.  It covers national and international policies and development and the causes and cures of international financial crises.  The course revolves around concepts of efficiency, equality, power, and institutions in the making of public policy towards globalization of communications and transportation. Offered as DBAP 616 and EDMP 616. Prereq: DBAP 665.
DBAP 617	Technology and Social System Design	3 Units	Managers are designers who shape the social and technical world we inhabit.  This course explores the process of design and asks how managers can become better designers and interventionists who anticipate and evaluate the social, economic, and political consequences of existing and emerging products, processes, and organizational forms. Offered as DBAP 617 and EDMP 617. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Doctor of Business Administration Program.
DBAP 638	Qualitative Inquiry I	3 Units	This course explores ways to conceptualize an object of study and facilitates formulation of students' conceptual work and production of research reports at the end of the first year of the program.  The course conveys how to generate research ideas by critically reviewing literature and developing ideas that contribute to a problem or issue of interest by working with theory and extending previous research.  The practicality of conducting certain kinds of research is evaluated and length, intensity and ethical constraints of different research efforts are examined.  Each student produces a report communicating and supporting a conceptualization of the phenomenon of interest involving independent, mediating and dependent variables.   The paper defines a problem of practice, presents, both visually and in narrative form, concepts shaped by field experience and prior writing that promote understanding of the problem, and includes a research proposal describing sample, data collection and data analysis. Offered as DBAP 638 and EDMP 638. Prereq: DBAP 665.
DBAP 640	Social Ethics: Contemporary Issues	3 Units	The course draws upon intellectual ancestors and current thinkers in moral philosophy and ethics to assist each student in identifying, analyzing, and discussing social and ethical questions pertaining to the definition and purpose of contemporary life, the need for moral coherence, and the meaning of life in a global society.  The unifying theme of the course is Tolstoy's question, "How then shall we live?"  The course does not seek to provide answers to the great questions of life.  Rather, it tries to expand each student's capacity to grapple with such questions. Offered as DBAP 640 and EDMP 640. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Doctor of Business Administration Program.
DBAP 641	Qualitative Inquiry II	3 Units	This course guides the student in conducting the qualitative research project that was proposed in EDMP 638.  Fieldwork and initial analysis is conducted during the summer when data based on semi-structure interviews is collected and analysis begins using inductive coding techniques.  A summer residency is held in mid-June to assess progress as final data collection and analysis continues.  The aim of the fall semester is to prepare a formal research report on that project, which will be submitted to an academic research conference.  The final report includes a revision of one's conceptual model, integrating new understandings and literature arising from the data collection and analysis. Offered as DBAP 641 and EDMP 641. Prereq: DBAP 638.
DBAP 642	Directed Studies Seminar	0 - 9 Units	At different times during the Program, EDM students register for Directed Studies courses.  The purpose of these courses is to recognize the work the students are doing to conduct and present their individualized research at a high quality level.  Activities conducted under the Directed Studies courses are dedicated to the collection of qualitative or quantitative data and the preparation of research reports. Offered as DBAP 642 and EDMP 642. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Doctor of Business Administration Program.
DBAP 643	Measuring Business Behaviors and Structures	3 Units	This course aims to develop the basic foundations and skills for designing and executing generalizable studies.  It focuses on building competence in model building, construct measurement, research design, data collection methodologies, and application of analytical software commonly involved in quantitative inquiry.  Covered topics include framing research questions, reliability and validity of measurement, quasi-experimental research design, and fieldwork for data collection.  Classes are designed to balance between the theory and practice of quantitative research design, and will be linked to the participant's own research projects. Offered as DBAP 643 and EDMP 643. Prereq: DBAP 641.
DBAP 645	Integration of Qualitative and Quantitative Inquiry	3 Units	Using the mixed method research toolkit developed in previous courses, this course focuses on critically analyzing selected pieces of published applied and policy research to develop a critical appreciation of issues and debates that have wide applicability and relevance.  In particular, it offers students ways to integrate and triangulate using a mixed method approach, different forms of evidence, and related evidence.  In addition, this course addresses common method choice and justification issues and related challenges of validity and theory formulation that typically arise during the students' execution of a series of individual research projects.  Application of critical analysis and appreciation approach in justifying mixed methods designs to the student's own research work is encouraged and supported by sharing and discussing common research and methodology themes and problems. Offered as DBAP 645 and EDMP 645. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Doctor of Business Administration Program.
DBAP 646	Advanced Analytical Methods for Generalizing Research	3 Units	This course addresses advanced topics in regression and structural equation modeling such as latent growth curve models, partial least squares, logit models, tests for various types of invariance, multiple-group analysis, multilevel analysis, and analyzing qualitative/categorical data.  These analytical methods are intended to enhance the student's toolkit as to facilitate a strong bridge to the academic literature and the application to specific data based problems that arise in applied managerial research. Offered as DBAP 646 and EDMP 646. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Doctor of Business Administration Program.
DBAP 648	Causal Analysis of Business Problems I	3 Units	Model Building & Validation I introduces fundamental concepts in theory-based model building and validation.  In this course students will develop, explore, refine and validate a range of models appropriate for addressing their problem of practice including classification models, process models, variance models, and articulating nomological networks.  In particular, the course will focus on effective conceptualizations of causation, control, mediation, and moderation.  Further, foundational statistical techniques such as tests of assumptions of the data, exploratory factor analysis, and regression and path analysis will be introduced. Offered as DBAP 648 and EDMP 648. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Doctor of Business Administration Program.
DBAP 649	Causal Analysis of Business Problems II	3 Units	Building upon the first course in Model Building & Validation, this course will guide students through the theoretically-grounded variance models that are required for testing through structural equation modeling (SEM) in the quantitative portion of their research.  Fundamental concepts in model testing will be reinforced using path analysis, and will include a deeper exploration of moderation by addressing topics such as moderated mediation and interaction effects.  Beyond the analysis the course will emphasize precise and accurate formulation of theoretical models and associated reasoning, as well as careful interpretation of findings.  The class will also delve into testing of data assumptions and prepare students for the model testing portion of their capstone assignments. Offered as DBAP 649 and EDMP 649. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Doctor of Business Administration Program.
DBAP 664	Knowledge Dissemination to Influence Managerial Practice	3 Units	The aim of this course is twofold.  First, it supports students organizing and writing their DM thesis overview or their PhD thesis proposal.  Also discussed are ways to organize and communicate in scientific genres, their aims and their generic properties.  Secondly, students become acquainted with scientific communication and publishing.  Effective reviewing, criteria for judging articles and theses, management of review processes, and how to communicate and respond to reviews are topics discussed.  The course also addresses publication strategies and ways of managing and communicating scientific and managerial knowledge to different stakeholders. Offered as DBAP 664 and EDMP 664. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Doctor of Business Administration Program.
DBAP 665	Introduction to Research Inquiry	3 Units	This course begins participants' three-year research experience.  Energized by one's personal passion and commitment to the topic, we seek for the work to be accomplished at a level that makes it worthy of widespread dissemination and influence as engaged scholars.  The goal in this course is to prepare students to develop their minds as scholars by understanding the world of research; develop a research identity by identifying one's research domain; learn to read academic literature and write in a scholarly style; work with academic literature to identify and digest concepts and theories that inform research on that problem; begin to develop a conceptual model that abstracts how the world may be functioning in that problem domain and points to a research question that can guide the next stage of the research.  The final deliverable for this course is to present the research topic with substantiation for its significance, relevance and timeliness in the management field.  This would include the research question(s); the literature review; and proposed qualitative methodology and analytical approach(es). Offered as DBAP 665 and EDMP 665. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Doctor of Business Administration Program.
DBAP 672	Flourishing Enterprise: Creating Sustainable Value for Business and World Benefit	3 Units	This course is designed to galvanize new visions of business and society, as well as organizational leadership.  The course is born of a conviction that the future of human society and the natural world is intimately linked to the future of the world economy, business enterprises, and management education.  The course presentations, books, dialogues, and interview projects are organized around three themes: (1) the state of the world and the economics possibilities of our time, (2) the business case for understanding business as an agent of world benefit--how business performance can profit from current and future advances in sustainable design and social entrepreneurship; and (3) tools for becoming a change leader--including the methods of Appreciative Inquiry and new insights about "strength-based" change emerging from the science of human strengths.  The overarching aim is to provide a powerful introduction to the many facets of sustainable value creation as a complete managerial approach. Offered as DBAP 672 and EDMP 672. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Doctor of Business Administration Program.
DBAP 673	Understanding, Designing, Managing Complex Systems	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to provide a perspective on systems thinking and complex systems and aid PhD students in expanding the ideas in their research on systems, systems models, and complex systems.  The work of the course will develop with increasingly difficult books on the subject of complex systems, a major case study in health care, and individual applications of the concepts to their potential research model and methods. Offered as DBAP 673 and EDMP 673. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Doctor of Business Administration Program.
DBAP 677	Designing Sustainable Systems	3 Units	Students in teams will recognize and work in practice on a managerial problem that involves dimensions of sustainability and design.  They will develop a set of solutions to the problem by generating alternative models and intervention strategies to address the problem.  The project results in a short presentation and written communication of the solution in a form of a poster or prototype.  The course will also include presentations of intervention and action research approaches and issues of inquiry validation and theory development. Offered as DBAP 677 and EDMP 677. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Doctor of Business Administration Program.
DBAP 680	Conflict & Cooperation in the Global Arena	3 Units	The global arena is described by some as a realm of perpetual conflict.  Others argue that given the right institutions and incentives, international actors can find ways to achieve cooperation, peace and increased global prosperity.  Still others suggest that the international political and economic arena is "what you make of it"--emphasizing the role of norms, identities and ideas in shaping international outcomes.  This course will examine both theoretical and policy perspectives regarding the question of international conflict and cooperation, with a specific emphasis on drawing on insights from collective action theory and international relations scholarship. Offered as DBAP 680 and EDMP 680. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the Doctor of Business Administration Program.
DBAP 699	Applied Research Project Continuation	1 - 9 Units	This course is set up individually upon conference between the student and a DM Faculty member and is designed in consult with the DM Program Director in order to complete the student's required coursework and research requirements within the DM Program. Offered as DBAP 699 and EDMP 699. Prereq: DBAP 665.
NUND 450	Applied Statistics	3 Units	This course will address the assumptions and applications necessary to analyze and interpret questions and research related to clinical practice. Emphasis will be on statistical interpretation of research and other scholarly activities. Data management, statistical analysis and data interpretation, as well as univariate and bivariate statistics will be examined. The course will include a brief overview of multivariate regression. The data analysis process will be examined and deconstructed throughout the course. Offered as NUND 450 and NURS 532. Prereq: STAT 201 or equivalent within past 5 years, or enrolled in the PhD Nursing program.
NUND 504	Theories for Nursing Practice and Scholarship	3 Units	This course will examine perspectives of the discipline, the nature of theory, theory development in nursing, and significant conceptualizations of nursing and related disciplines. Application of theory to practice, practice change and scholarship will be explored.
NUND 506	Leadership in Organizations and Systems	3 Units	This course introduces the student to organizational design and leadership. The focus is developing skills to effectively lead individuals and teams toward maximizing organizational effectiveness.  Elements of this course will include:  diversity, organization culture, systems, communication, innovation and change.
NUND 507	Business Concepts in Advanced Nursing Practice Leadership	3 Units	This course will focus on business concepts and issues related to advanced nursing practice leadership. Seminars will focus on integrating business-related ethical, legal, fiscal, and other intervening variables that affect environments of care. Prereq: NUND 506.
NUND 508	Health Care Policy and Planning	3 Units	The primary focus of this course is to explore the leadership role of nurses in health policy development and implementation as well as the role of research in health care policy formation and planning.  Special emphasis is placed on selected national and international health policy issues that form the socio-political and economic context of nursing care and practice.  Ethical dimensions of public policy formulations and implementation are highlighted. Offered as NUND 508 and NURS 609.
NUND 509	Foundations of Leadership in Nursing Education	3 Units	This course will emphasize educational leadership and faculty development, focusing on the scholarship of teaching, research, and service. The learner will apply theoretical principles to enhance teaching, learning, assessment, and mentoring at the course or program level in academic and practice settings. Prereq: NUND 506.
NUND 510	Application of Health Information Technology and Systems	1 Unit	This course will provide an overview of health information technology (HIT), including evolving trends.  Policy, legal and ethical issues will be explored related to the use of HIT by health care providers and consumers.  Evaluation of HIT will be incorporated in the course.
NUND 512	Advanced Leadership and Management in Health Care Organizations	2 Units	This course will focus on the system-level executive leadership role of nurses in health care organizations. The course will examine strategic leadership and management planning, process improvement, and local, national and global influences on health system functioning.  Emphasis will be placed on developing executive strategies within the dynamics of competitive health care environments. Prereq: NUND 504 and NUND 506.
NUND 540	Practice Focused Inquiry I	3 Units	This course will introduce the student to a variety of approaches that can be used for practice-focused inquiry, including concepts related to population health.  Applications of beginning elements of the scholarly process to practice-focused inquiry will be reviewed.  Elements include development of a problem statement and literature review.  (Alternate pre-req to NUND 450: Applied statistics course within the past 5 years). Prereq: NUND 504 and NUND 450.
NUND 541	Practice-Focused Inquiry II	3 Units	This course builds on Practice-Focused Inquiry I. The content expands student understanding of practice-focused methodology, including aims, a conceptual or theoretical framework, setting, sample, sources of data, measures and instruments.  The student applies appropriate methodology to the development of a plan for their scholarly practice-focused project. Ethical issues and mechanisms for dissemination of the project results are included. Prereq: NUND 540.
NUND 607	Advanced Leadership in Healthcare	2 Units	This course will build upon and apply knowledge of leadership strategies from previous coursework.  Students will address the successful management of clinical challenges within the dynamic healthcare environment. The course will emphasize the development of strategic capacity, enabling students to navigate complex clinical issues within the healthcare setting. Prereq: NUND 507.
NUND 609	Systems Leadership in Educational Practice	2 Units	This course will examine the nurse's role as an education leader in academic and practice settings at the system level. Learners will explore theories and principles of educational leadership and management. Strategies to promote diversity, equity, and inclusion will be examined. Interprofessional competencies will be explored. Prereq: NUND 509.
NUND 610	Translating Evidence into Nursing Practice	3 Units	This course focuses on methods for developing best practice protocols, and translating them into practice.
NUND 611	DNP Practicum	1 - 2 Units	Under the guidance of the faculty advisor and designated mentor (s), the student will develop, implement and evaluate specific clinical practice experience(s) that prepare the student to lead in collaborative practice.  Selected competencies of the DNP-prepared nurse will be advanced. Note: Admission to the DNP Program required. Prereq: NUND 504 or NUND 506.
NUND 612	Transformational Leadership in Executive Nursing Practice	3 Units	This course will focus on transformational leadership and entrepreneurial concepts as applied to executive nursing practice. This course will include theoretical understandings of innovation, visioning and inspirational skills to lead change and improve clinical nurse and patient/client outcomes at the organizational system level, within the context of complex health care systems. Prereq: NUND 512.
NUND 615	Teaching Practicum	1 - 6 Units	In this preceptored teaching practicum, the student may engage in classroom, laboratory, and clinical teaching assignments in nursing.  The student will be expected to use current educational theory and nursing knowledge in completing the practicum experience (minimum 60 hours). Prereq: NUND 609 or NURS 619.
NUND 619	DNP Project Proposal Development	1 - 2 Units	Under the guidance of the student's chair and committee, the student will develop a proposal for a project to address a practice-based problem. Prereq: NUND 541.
NUND 620	DNP Project Implementation	1 - 3 Units	Under the guidance of the advisor and committee, the student will complete a systematic investigation of a previously identified practice-based problem.  The experience will include acceptable decision on the project by the CWRU Institutional Review Board (IRB), and outside IRB if necessary, and analysis of data.  The project will culminate with a written report, including results and discussion, and an oral defense of the project.  Completion of Proposal Development (NUND 619, at least 2 credits) and all DNP coursework is required.  May be taken concurrently with NUND 611 Practicum. Prereq: NUND 619.
EEPS 101	The Earth and Planets	3 Units	An examination of the geological processes that have shaped the planets and moons of the inner solar system, focusing on those with relevance to our own planet Earth.  Following an introduction to the fundamentals of planetary geology, lectures and exercises will explore how the inner planets (the asteroids, Mercury, Venus, Earth, the Moon, and Mars) exhibit the effects of planetary differentiation, impact cratering, volcanic activity, tectonics, climate, and interactions with life.
EEPS 110	Physical Geology	3 Units	Introduction to geologic processes and materials that shape the world we live in. Hydrologic cycle and evolution of landscapes. Earthquakes, volcanoes, plate tectonics, and geologic resources. Students desiring laboratory experience should enroll in EEPS 119 concurrently.
EEPS 115	Introduction to Oceanography	3 Units	The sciences of oceanography. Physical, chemical, biologic, and geologic features and processes of the oceans. Differences and similarities between the oceans and large lakes including the Great Lakes.  Required: Sunday field trip.
EEPS 117	Weather and Climate	3 Units	Introduction to the study of weather and climate. Covers the basics of meteorology, climate zones, the hydrologic cycle, and weather prediction. Lectures address timely topics including greenhouse warming, past global climates, and recent advances in meteorology.
EEPS 119	Geology Laboratory	1 Unit	Principles and techniques common to the geological sciences including rock and mineral identification, map interpretation, land form analysis, application of geological information to engineering works, and more. One three-hour laboratory or field trip weekly. Recommended preparation: EEPS 110.
EEPS 202	Global Environmental Problems	3 Units	Global Environmental Problems is a course designed to provide students with an understanding of, and an appreciation for, human-influenced environmental changes that are global in scope.  Accordingly, much of the material will focus on the nature and structure of natural global systems, how and where in those systems human influences occur, and will delve deeply into a few particular problems and solutions of current interest, such as population growth, climate change, ozone depletion, and fisheries, from a variety of viewpoints. Offered as ESTD 202 and EEPS 202.
EEPS 205	Climate Change Science and Society	3 Units	This course provides a synoptic, multi-disciplinary understanding of the past, present, and future of anthropogenic climate change by integrating three distinct fields: the earth and environmental sciences, biology and ecology, and history. What is changing in the global climate? Why? How do we know? What should we expect in the future? What can be done? No single discipline can answer these questions fully, and by organizing the course around these big questions, we will demonstrate how different disciplines each contribute essential answers. Course covers diverse sources of evidence for climate change in the past and present, the core mechanisms of climate change at different timescales and their consequences, the impact of climate change on human history and history of the discovery of climate change, climate models and ecological forecasts, the modern politics and diplomacy of climate, climate communication, and multiple paths forward for the earth's physical, ecological, and social systems. Offered as BIOL 205, EEPS 205, and HSTY 205.
EEPS 210	Earth History: Time, Tectonics, Climate, and Life	3 Units	The discovery and measurement of deep time, tectonic cycles, and geochemical cycles. The origin of life, major fossil groups and their evolution over time. Earth systems history:  Major tectonic, ecologic, and climatic events in the last 4.5 billion years.
EEPS 220	Environmental Geology	3 Units	Geological attributes of environmental settings. Analysis of geologic conditions pertinent to engineering works. Site development, resource availability, urban planning, recognition and assessment of geologic hazards. Recommended preparation: EEPS 110 and EEPS 119.
EEPS 225	Evolution	3 Units	Multidisciplinary study of the course and processes of organic evolution provides a broad understanding of the evolution of structural and functional diversity, the relationships among organisms and their environments, and the phylogenetic relationships among major groups of organisms.  Topics include the genetic basis of micro- and macro-evolutionary change, the concept of adaptation, natural selection, population dynamics, theories of species formation, principles of phylogenetic inference, biogeography, evolutionary rates, evolutionary convergence, homology, Darwinian medicine, and conceptual and philosophic issues in evolutionary theory. Offered as ANTH 225, BIOL 225, EEPS 225, HSTY 225, and PHIL 225.
EEPS 260	Introduction to Climate Change: Physics, Forecasts, and Strategies	3 Units	This is a one-semester introduction to the physical processes that determine Earth's past, present, and future climate. The course focuses on quantitatively understanding the human impact on climate, including the historical development of steadily more sophisticated physical models, and ever more complete data. Particular emphasis will be placed on understanding climate change projections, as well as the ethical, political, economic, and communications challenges associated with various strategies going forward. The course is appropriate for all majors. Offered as EEPS 260 and PHYS 260.
EEPS 301	Stratigraphy and Sedimentation	3 Units	Formation, distribution, and composition of sediments and sedimentary rocks. Modern depositional environments and their ancient analogues; principles of stratigraphic and biostratigraphic correlation. Two lectures and one laboratory per week.  Offered as EEPS 301 and EEPS 401.
EEPS 303	Environmental Law	3 Units	Introduction to treatment of environmental issues in legal proceedings.  Sources of environmental law, legal procedure, common law remedies (toxic torts and human health, nuisance, contract law), statutes and regulations, endangered species, public lands, toxics regulation, nuclear power, coal.  The course employs the case method of reading and recitation of appellate judicial opinions.  We read both classic cases in environmental law as well as current controversies. Offered as ESTD 303 and EEPS 303.
EEPS 305	Geomorphology and Remote Sensing	3 Units	Recognition and interpretation of land forms and their significance in revealing present and past geologic processes. Introduction to acquisition and analysis of data through aerial photography and satellite imagery. Two lectures and one laboratory weekly. Recommended preparation: EEPS 110 and EEPS 119. Offered as EEPS 305 and EEPS 405.
EEPS 307	Evolutionary Biology and Paleobiology of Invertebrates	3 Units	Important events in the evolution of invertebrate life; structure, function, and phylogeny of major invertebrate groups.
EEPS 315	Structural Geology and Geodynamics	3 Units	Theoretical analysis of deformation in earth materials, with illustrations of deformational styles in various tectonic settings and the dynamics of the Earth's interior. Recommended preparation: EEPS 110. Offered as EEPS 315 and EEPS 415.
EEPS 317	Introduction to Field Methods	3 Units	Practice in field procedures, recognition and testing of hypotheses in the field, field mapping and analysis of sedimentary, igneous, and metamorphic rocks in deformed and tectonically active settings. Weekly meeting plus spring break field trip. Students required to pay partial cost of meals, lodging, and travel. Offered as EEPS 317 and EEPS 417. Prereq: EEPS 119.
EEPS 321	Hydrogeology	3 Units	Basic and applied concepts pertaining to the occurrence and movement of groundwater.  Definitions, basic equations, applications to a variety of geologic settings, wells.  Requires one Saturday field trip to make field measurements, collect and analyze data, and prepare a report. Offered as EEPS 321 and EEPS 421.
EEPS 340	Earth and Planetary Interiors	3 Units	Quantitative introduction to the composition, structure, dynamics, and evolution of Earth and other planets using principles of geophysics and geochemistry. Planetary formation and differentiation, composition and structure of Earth and planets, heat generation and heat flow, mantle convection and plate tectonics, planetary magnetism and core dynamics, chemical evolution of Earth and planets, extrasolar planets and super Earths. This course will be offered to both undergraduate students and graduates. In addition to the requirements for undergraduate students, graduate students will be asked to work on a small course project relevant to the subject of the course and submit a term paper based on this project by the end of semester. Offered as EEPS 340 and EEPS 440. Prereq: MATH 122 or MATH 126.
EEPS 341	Mineralogy	4 Units	Crystallography, hand specimen mineralogy and petrology, principles of crystal structure and crystal chemistry, elementary geochemistry and phase diagrams, and an introduction to the petrographic microscope. Three lectures and one three-hour laboratory weekly. Prereq: EEPS 119.
EEPS 344	Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology	4 Units	Composition, classification, and genesis of igneous and metamorphic rocks, emphasizing physical and chemical principles governing their origin. Laboratory study of rocks in thin section. Two lectures and two three-hour laboratories weekly. Prereq: EEPS 341.
EEPS 345	Planetary Materials	3 Units	An inquiry-driven, lab-based exploration of the materials that make up the solid matter of the solar system. Each class period consists of a microscopy-based laboratory exercise examining a unique aspect of planetary materials such as meteorites, cosmic dust, lunar samples and ancient terrestrial rocks, and their relationship to modern natural materials and solar system processes. Offered as EEPS 345 and EEPS 445. Prereq: EEPS 119 or BIOL 214L or BIOL 215L or CHEM 113 or PHYS 115 or PHYS 121.
EEPS 349	Geological Problems	1 - 3 Units	Special work arranged according to the qualifications of the student.
EEPS 350	Geochemistry	3 Units	Introduction to geochemistry. Properties of the elements, elemental and isotopic fractionation, element transport, geochemical systems, geochronology, mineral reactions, the solid Earth, Earth in the solar system. A quantitative approach to modeling geochemical processes will be emphasized throughout. Offered as EEPS 350 and EEPS 450.
EEPS 352	Biogeochemistry	3 Units	This course is intended for upper-level undergraduate and graduate students and will focus on global environmental changes and the intersections between biology, geology, chemistry and environmental sciences. Throughout the semester students will explore the cycling of biologically important elements (carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus) in order to understand their role in shaping ecosystem processes and in the development of life on Earth. In the first half of the class, students will explore the biological/chemical processes that shape the past, present and future Earth System. In the second half of the course, students will investigate inter-related nature of these processes/reactions in regulating global biogeochemical cycles. Topics to be covered in this class include the origin of the Earth, elements and life; the Gaia Hypothesis; Geochemical tools to study Earth processes; biological and chemical processes occurring on Earth's surface; Global Climate/Environmental Change.  Recommended Preparation: (CHEM 105 or CHEM 111) and (CHEM 106 or ENGR 145). Offered as EEPS 352 and EEPS 452.
EEPS 367	Topics in Evolutionary Biology	3 Units	The focus for this course on a special topic of interest in evolutionary biology will vary from one offering to the next. Examples of possible topics include theories of speciation, the evolution of language, the evolution of sex, evolution and biodiversity, molecular evolution. ANAT/ANTH/EEPS/PHIL/PHOL 467/BIOL 468 will require a longer, more sophisticated term paper, and additional class presentation. Offered as ANTH 367, BIOL 368, EEPS 367, PHIL 367, ANAT 467, ANTH 467, BIOL 468, EEPS 467, PHIL 467 and PHOL 467. Prereq: EEPS 225 or equivalent.
EEPS 390	Introduction to Geological Research	3 Units	Examination of factors in the selection, design, and conduct of research projects and in the analysis and interpretation of research results.  Consideration of ethical issues in scientific research. Development of a written research proposal and oral presentation of proposed research.  Consultations with department faculty in development of research proposal.  Research initiation. Offered as EEPS 390 and EEPS 490. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
EEPS 391	Senior Project	2 Units	Research project required of all department majors, based on formal project proposals presented to department faculty. Proposals may be submitted prior to the semester in which EEPS 391 is taken. Grading based on project progress presentation that will include a statement of the problem, a literature review, a description of their field/lab work and presentation of their data collected to date.  This course is the first of a 2 semester Senior Capstone (EEPS 391, 392) sequence.  Recommended preparation: EEPS 390. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
EEPS 392	Professional Presentation	2 Units	Preparation and presentation of final written and oral reports on individual Senior Projects.  Class meetings focus on group discussion of problem areas in analysis and interpretation of project results, and in styles of writing poster and oral presentation as demonstrated by practice examples. This course is the second in a two-course (EEPS 391, 392) Senior Capstone sequence. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: EEPS 390 and EEPS 391. Or Coreq: EEPS 390.
EEPS 396	Undergraduate Research in Evolutionary Biology	3 Units	Students propose and conduct guided research on an aspect of evolutionary biology. The research will be sponsored and supervised by a member of the CASE faculty or other qualified professional. A written report must be submitted to the Evolutionary Biology Steering Committee before credit is granted. Offered as ANTH 396, BIOL 396, EEPS 396, and PHIL 396.
EEPS 401	Stratigraphy and Sedimentation	3 Units	Formation, distribution, and composition of sediments and sedimentary rocks. Modern depositional environments and their ancient analogues; principles of stratigraphic and biostratigraphic correlation. Two lectures and one laboratory per week.  Offered as EEPS 301 and EEPS 401.
EEPS 405	Geomorphology and Remote Sensing	3 Units	Recognition and interpretation of land forms and their significance in revealing present and past geologic processes. Introduction to acquisition and analysis of data through aerial photography and satellite imagery. Two lectures and one laboratory weekly. Recommended preparation: EEPS 110 and EEPS 119. Offered as EEPS 305 and EEPS 405.
EEPS 415	Structural Geology and Geodynamics	3 Units	Theoretical analysis of deformation in earth materials, with illustrations of deformational styles in various tectonic settings and the dynamics of the Earth's interior. Recommended preparation: EEPS 110. Offered as EEPS 315 and EEPS 415.
EEPS 417	Introduction to Field Methods	3 Units	Practice in field procedures, recognition and testing of hypotheses in the field, field mapping and analysis of sedimentary, igneous, and metamorphic rocks in deformed and tectonically active settings. Weekly meeting plus spring break field trip. Students required to pay partial cost of meals, lodging, and travel. Offered as EEPS 317 and EEPS 417.
EEPS 421	Hydrogeology	3 Units	Basic and applied concepts pertaining to the occurrence and movement of groundwater.  Definitions, basic equations, applications to a variety of geologic settings, wells.  Requires one Saturday field trip to make field measurements, collect and analyze data, and prepare a report. Offered as EEPS 321 and EEPS 421.
EEPS 437	Chemistry of Natural Waters	3 Units	Advanced topics in aquatic chemistry. Thermodynamics models for ion/ligand speciation in natural waters; origin and composition of seawater, chemical and mineralogical sequence during evaporation, chemical weathering, groundwater and river water chemistry, chemical cycling and a global mass balances; perturbations on natural systems by man.  Predictive capabilities of box models.
EEPS 440	Earth and Planetary Interiors	3 Units	Quantitative introduction to the composition, structure, dynamics, and evolution of Earth and other planets using principles of geophysics and geochemistry. Planetary formation and differentiation, composition and structure of Earth and planets, heat generation and heat flow, mantle convection and plate tectonics, planetary magnetism and core dynamics, chemical evolution of Earth and planets, extrasolar planets and super Earths. This course will be offered to both undergraduate students and graduates. In addition to the requirements for undergraduate students, graduate students will be asked to work on a small course project relevant to the subject of the course and submit a term paper based on this project by the end of semester. Offered as EEPS 340 and EEPS 440. Prereq: MATH 122 or MATH 126.
EEPS 445	Planetary Materials	3 Units	An inquiry-driven, lab-based exploration of the materials that make up the solid matter of the solar system. Each class period consists of a microscopy-based laboratory exercise examining a unique aspect of planetary materials such as meteorites, cosmic dust, lunar samples and ancient terrestrial rocks, and their relationship to modern natural materials and solar system processes. Offered as EEPS 345 and EEPS 445.
EEPS 450	Geochemistry	3 Units	Introduction to geochemistry. Properties of the elements, elemental and isotopic fractionation, element transport, geochemical systems, geochronology, mineral reactions, the solid Earth, Earth in the solar system. A quantitative approach to modeling geochemical processes will be emphasized throughout. Offered as EEPS 350 and EEPS 450.
EEPS 452	Biogeochemistry	3 Units	This course is intended for upper-level undergraduate and graduate students and will focus on global environmental changes and the intersections between biology, geology, chemistry and environmental sciences. Throughout the semester students will explore the cycling of biologically important elements (carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus) in order to understand their role in shaping ecosystem processes and in the development of life on Earth. In the first half of the class, students will explore the biological/chemical processes that shape the past, present and future Earth System. In the second half of the course, students will investigate inter-related nature of these processes/reactions in regulating global biogeochemical cycles. Topics to be covered in this class include the origin of the Earth, elements and life; the Gaia Hypothesis; Geochemical tools to study Earth processes; biological and chemical processes occurring on Earth's surface; Global Climate/Environmental Change.  Recommended Preparation: (CHEM 105 or CHEM 111) and (CHEM 106 or ENGR 145). Offered as EEPS 352 and EEPS 452.
EEPS 467	Topics in Evolutionary Biology	3 Units	The focus for this course on a special topic of interest in evolutionary biology will vary from one offering to the next. Examples of possible topics include theories of speciation, the evolution of language, the evolution of sex, evolution and biodiversity, molecular evolution. ANAT/ANTH/EEPS/PHIL/PHOL 467/BIOL 468 will require a longer, more sophisticated term paper, and additional class presentation. Offered as ANTH 367, BIOL 368, EEPS 367, PHIL 367, ANAT 467, ANTH 467, BIOL 468, EEPS 467, PHIL 467 and PHOL 467.
EEPS 490	Introduction to Geological Research	3 Units	Examination of factors in the selection, design, and conduct of research projects and in the analysis and interpretation of research results.  Consideration of ethical issues in scientific research. Development of a written research proposal and oral presentation of proposed research.  Consultations with department faculty in development of research proposal.  Research initiation. Offered as EEPS 390 and EEPS 490. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
EEPS 506	Seminar in Geophysics	1 - 3 Units	Selected topics in geophysics: advanced research issues, classical papers, current state of the field, advanced techniques. Course content will vary depending on interests of students and faculty.
EEPS 509	Seminar: Graduate Research	1 Unit	
EEPS 511	Special Readings in Geology	1 - 6 Units	Detailed study of a selected topic in geology under the guidance of a faculty member.
EEPS 512	Special Readings in Geology	1 - 6 Units	Detailed study of a selected topic in geology under the guidance of a faculty member.
EEPS 601	Special Problems and Research	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
EEPS 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
EEPS 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
ECON 102	Principles of Microeconomics	3 Units	This course is an introduction to microeconomic theory, providing a foundation for future study in economics. In particular, it addresses how individuals and businesses make choices concerning the use of scarce resources, how prices and incomes are determined in competitive markets, and how market power affects the prices and quantities of goods available to society. We will also examine the impact of government intervention in the economy.
ECON 103	Principles of Macroeconomics	3 Units	While Microeconomics looks at individual consumers and firms, Macroeconomics looks at the economy as a whole. The focus of this class will be on the business cycle. Unemployment, inflation and national production all change with the business cycle. We will look at how these are measured, their past behavior and at theoretical models that attempt to explain this behavior. We will also look at the role of the Federal Government and the Federal Reserve Bank of the United States in managing the business cycle.
ECON 216	Data Visualization in R	3 Units	Visualizations, such as graphs and maps, provide a compelling and intuitively appealing approach to understanding data and communicating that understanding to others. This course provides a practical, hands-on introduction to the creation of beautiful visual displays of social science data. We will learn the powerful but easy to use visualization tools in the R language. No prior experience in working with data or in coding is required. Counts for CAS Quantitative Reasoning Requirement. Prereq: Sophomore student standing.
ECON 307	Intermediate Macro Theory	3 Units	Macroeconomics studies aggregate indicators of the performance of an economy, most commonly measured in terms of GDP, and the rates of unemployment and inflation. An important goal of macroeconomic researchers is to develop a model of an economy that is simple, yet powerful enough to explain the historical trends of these aggregate economic indicators. Needless to say, coming up with a good model has remained a very difficult task. So far, there is no single model that is good enough to coherently explain even the most prominent historical trends of aggregate economic indicators. But several models have been built, each offering insight into a certain aspect of the economy. Throughout the course model building is motivated by real world cases from the American economy. Prereq: ECON 102 and ECON 103.
ECON 308	Intermediate Micro Theory	3 Units	This course builds on ECON 102 and provides a more in-depth analysis of the theory of the consumer, the theory of the firm, market equilibrium, market  failure and government intervention in the market. The focus in this class is on intuition, rather than mathematical derivations, although there will be some.   You should come away from this course with a greater understanding of how consumers and firms make their decisions and how they interact in the market place. Note: a student cannot receive degree credit for both ECON 308 and ECON 309. Prereq: ECON 102 and (MATH 121 or MATH 125).
ECON 309	Intermediate Micro Theory: Calculus-Based	3 Units	This course builds on Economics 102 and provides a more in-depth analysis of the theory of the consumer, the theory of the firm, market equilibrium, market failure and government intervention in the market.  We will use calculus to derive supply, demand and market equilibrium from first principles.  You should come away from this course with a greater understanding of how consumers and firms make their decisions and how they interact in the market place.  Note: a student cannot receive degree credit for both ECON 308 and ECON 309. Prereq: ECON 102 and (MATH 122 or MATH 126).
ECON 312	Entrepreneurial Finance	3 Units	This course explores the financing and financial management of entrepreneurial new ventures. The course will focus on issues of financial management of new ventures (forecasting cash flows, cash flow management, valuation, capital structure) and the various financial methods and mechanisms available to entrepreneurs (bootstrapping, angel investors, venture capitalists, IPOs). Offered as ENTP 310 and ECON 312.
ECON 313	Experiential Entrepreneurship	3 Units	Experiential entrepreneurship places students in a startup (founded by the student or someone else) for a semester, while simultaneously teaching students key concepts for startup success in a classroom setting.  Each session covers tools and concepts that every entrepreneur should understand, and students should be able to apply these tools and concepts to their host companies. Prereq: ECON 102.
ECON 326	Econometrics	4 Units	Econometrics is the application of statistics to empirical economic analysis. One way of testing the validity of economic theories is to gather data and apply statistical tests to see if the data support the theory. These data are usually gathered by observing actual economies, firms and consumers, rather than by performing experiments in a laboratory. Because field data does not have the precision and control of laboratory data, analysts must compensate by adjusting their statistical procedures. In this class, we will concentrate on regression analysis, which is the basic tool of the economic researcher. We will study the assumptions commonly made in the application of this technique, the consequences of violating these assumptions, and the corrections that can be made. Students will have a chance to formulate and test their own hypotheses using econometric software available for personal computers. Prereq: ECON 102 and ECON 103 and (OPRE 207 or STAT 243 or STAT 312).
ECON 327	Advanced Econometrics	3 Units	This class builds on the foundations of applied regression analysis developed in ECON 326.  The goal of the class is to equip students with the tools to conduct a causal analysis of a hypothesis in a variety of settings.  Topics will include causality, panel and time series data, instrumental variables and quasi-experiments, semi- and non-parametric methods, and treatment evaluation. Offered as ECON 327 and ECON 427. Prereq: ECON 326.
ECON 328	Designing Experiments for Social Science, Policy, and Management	3 Units	Both economists and firms are increasingly relying on experiments to study the economic behavior of individuals and the effectiveness of policies in a wide range of settings. This course gives students the tools they need to design and critique experiments that answer a research or business question. A small part of the class will be devoted to important theoretical concepts in experimental design, such as treatments, factorial designs, randomization, internal and external validity, biases, and inference problems. The bulk will be devoted to learning about how these concepts come together by discussing exciting new experimental work on topics such as discrimination and identity, cooperation versus self-interest, and dishonesty and corruption. Prereq: ECON 102 and (OPRE 207, STAT 201, STAT 243, STAT 312, ANTH 319, or PSCL 282).
ECON 329	Game Theory: The Economics of Thinking Strategically	3 Units	The term "game theory" refers to the set of tools economists use to think about strategic interactions among small groups of individuals and firms.  The primary purpose of this course is to introduce students to the basic concepts of game theory and its applications.  The class will stress the use of game theory as a tool for building models of important economic phenomena.  The class will also include a number of experiments designed to illustrate the game theoretic results, and to highlight how reality may depart from the theory.  The course will stress the value of thinking strategically and provide students with a framework for thinking strategically in their everyday lives.  Rather than approaching each strategic situation they encounter as a unique problem, students will be taught to recognize patterns in the situations they face and to generalize from specific experiences.  A paper on an application of game theory will be required for graduate students. Offered as ECON 329 and ECON 429. Prereq: ECON 102.
ECON 330	Economic Behavior and Psychology	3 Units	This course is an introduction to Behavioral Economics, a growing field which incorporates insights from other disciplines--primarily psychology-- into microeconomic models. We will cover fundamental aspects of decision-making, such as how people respond to risk, how people make trade-offs between short-term and long-term rewards, and the ways in which people aren't as selfish as standard economic models suggest. We will cover novel economic models that can accommodate phenomena such as altruism, loss aversion, and self-control problems. We will discuss empirical applications of these concepts in areas ranging from personal finance and health  to marketing and public policy. Prereq: ECON 102.
ECON 332	Economic Analysis of Labor Markets	3 Units	This course explores the economics of work and pay. We take a comprehensive look at labor markets in the U.S. and other advanced countries and examine related social policy issues. These include the effect of unions on wages; the underpinnings of the income distribution of the U.S.; issues of poverty and welfare; discrimination and wage differential by gender and race; the relationship between work and family; education as a determinant of wages; immigration and migration, and the way firms use wage and employment practices to motivate their employees to work productively. What makes labor economics special is that the commodity we examine is human labor, something that is central to the organization of our lives and the functioning of the economy. Labor economics thus applies the standard neoclassical model of demand, supply, and equilibrium to many areas that also have a profound human dimension. Prereq: ECON 102.
ECON 333	The Economics of Organizations and Employment Relationships	3 Units	Economic activity is guided not only by the "invisible hand" of the market, but also by the "visible hand" of management.  This class uses microeconomic concepts to understand different ways of organizing economic activity, including firms, cooperatives, and state-owned enterprises.  The course focuses on the roles of information, property rights, and incentives in determining the origin and performance of different types of organizations. We look at problems faced by real organizations, examining questions such as, are Facebook and Uber fundamentally new types of firms? Why do some firms offer high-paying jobs while competitors in the same industry do not (eg, Costco vs. Wal-mart)?  What are the impacts of different kinds of contracts with workers and supply chain firms on incentives to work hard, invest, and innovate? Should firms maximize shareholder value, or something else? Why are firms often not able to survive "disruptive innovation"? Are venture capitalists promoters or thwarters of innovation? An objective of the course is to give students a rigorous understanding of fundamental principles that will allow them to examine their own careers, even as many features of the economy change dramatically. Prereq: ECON 102.
ECON 338	Law and Economics	3 Units	This course examines legal institutions and rules from an economic perspective. Students will learn when and how legal rules can be efficient. Topics will include property law (including intellectual property), tort law, contracts, and crime.  Offered as ECON 338 and ECON 438. Prereq: ECON 102.
ECON 341	Money and Banking	3 Units	This course emphasizes the importance of financial markets, the nature and role of the financial system, and the linkages between these--money and banking--and the economy.  Emphasis is placed on both theoretical and practical constructs, on major innovations and contemporary changes, and the closely intertwined condition of financial and economic systems with monetary and fiscal policy. Offered as BAFI 341 and ECON 341.
ECON 342	Public Finance	3 Units	Government intervention is a pervasive feature of every modern economy. The goal of this course is to develop the economic tools for understanding and evaluating a wide range of government behaviors such as taxation and redistribution policy, the public provision of goods and services, and the regulation of private markets. ECON 342 begins by considering "market failures" that justify government intervention in a market economy. To respond to such failures, governments must raise revenues through taxation. Using the tools of microeconomic theory, we will develop a framework for thinking about the positive and normative effects of alternative forms of taxation. Particular attention will be paid to the individual income tax in the U.S., allowing students to understand the efficiency, distributional and behavioral implications of recent changes in the tax code. We will then turn to the expenditure side of the public sector. The economic principles used to evaluate public expenditures will be discussed and exemplified through the analysis of significant public programs. Of particular interest will be the effect of public programs on the incentives faced by workers and families. Prereq: ECON 102.
ECON 346	Economic Perspectives	3 Units	This course examines important contemporary and historical issues from an economic perspective. It enables students to think about the world "like an economist." Possible topics of current interest include the transformation of Eastern Europe; ethnic and racial strife; environmental policy and sustainable development; and professional sports.
ECON 350	Regional and Urban Economics: The Case of Israel	3 Units	The goal of this course is to develop a deep understanding of core issue in regional and urban economics. Israel, by dint of its unique history and geo-political environment, provides a fascinating case study on the impact of refugees and immigration, urban planning and governance, security concerns, inequities and discrimination, labor force participation, poverty, environmentalism, and regional cooperation. This course provides a learning experience about these topics both via classroom time at Israeli universities and through visits to carefully chosen sites throughout the country. The trip includes a small amount of discretionary time for visiting spiritually significant sites as well. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ECON 102 or ECON 103.
ECON 355	The Origins of the Modern Economy	3 Units	This course in economic history investigates the process by which the modern industrial economy, with its high and growing standard of living, came into being. It traces the development of important pre-modern economic institutions, such as agriculture, states, markets, and long-distance trade. The industrial revolution, the fulcrum that launched the modern economy, is then explored in detail, including its origins and uneven spread around the world. Prereq: ECON 102.
ECON 360	Economics of Crime	3 Units	Crime and incarceration impose tremendous costs on society with lasting impact on individuals, families, and communities. Over the past four decades, the incarceration rate in the United States has grown to an historically unprecedented level with approximately 2.2 million people behind bars. In light of the substantial resources allocated towards crime, it is only natural to ask whether the criminal justice system achieves its goals. The purpose of this course is to develop the analytical skills necessary for understanding the economic rational for criminal law and the criminal justice system. Through the lens of microeconomic theory, we will deal with questions such as when and what to criminalize, the severity of punishment, the determinants of the supply of criminal activity, the effects of policing, and the optimal level of enforcement. This course will introduce students to key concepts in crime policy and help develop their policy analysis skills, including the ability to frame problems and policy alternatives, think critically about empirical evidence, use cost-effectiveness and cost-benefit analysis to compare policy alternatives, and communicate the findings in writing. Prereq: ECON 102.
ECON 362	Applied Business Economics	3 Units	The goal of this course is to learn a set of statistical tools and research designs that are used by business economists, those who evaluate topics important for making business decisions and understanding the macroeconomy, working for a firm or government agency. The focus is on topics not covered in other economics courses pertaining to Economic Measurement and Applied Business/Financial Econometrics. This course emphasizes the work of a practitioner, thereby building on theoretical models learned in microeconomics, macroeconomics, and econometrics. Topics covered in this course will be of particular interest to students considering working as an economist in the private sector. They also help prepare students for the National Association for Business Economics (NABE) Certification in Applied Business Economics and Data Analytics (CBE) exam. Prereq: ECON 102 and ECON 103 and (ECON 326 or BAFI 361).
ECON 364	Economic Analysis of Business Strategies	3 Units	This course examines how companies compete against each other and interact with customers in an effort to increase profits.  Topics include: pricing strategies, product differentiation, advertising, R&D strategies, bundling and tie-ins, entry barriers, mergers and acquisitions, collusion and cartels, the dynamics of network industries (e.g. information technology), and technology adoption and diffusion.  The course will take two complementary perspectives.  First, we will consider the point of view of companies, and ask how different business strategies can affect competitive success.  Second, we will consider the perspective of consumers and policymakers: we will ask whether different firm strategies enhance or reduce social welfare, and will explore different policy options to increase welfare (e.g. antitrust policies, patent systems).  The first part of the course will utilize a range of basic economic tools.  In the second part of the course, we will apply what was learned in the first part to real examples of firms and industries, including both business and legal cases. Offered as ECON 364 and ECON 464. Prereq: ECON 102.
ECON 366	Economics of Sports	3 Units	The world of sports provides many captivating examples of how economic tools and methods can be understood through real-world applications. While the popularity of sports is unquestioned, there are many ways in which economics can delve more deeply into the hidden inner-workings of the sports world. When sports teams acquire a new player, are they attempting to maximize wins, or profits? Do the NCAA, NFL, or other sports leagues have a monopoly, and what costs would this entail? What incentives guide sports teams, strategies, and would they ever lose on purpose? Is it worth it to subsidize a sports team to build a new stadium, or renovate an existing arena, in your city? The purpose of this course is to perform economic analysis of sports teams, leagues, and institutions by applying economic tools to a variety of sport-related topics. Microeconomic theory is applied to these questions, and others, drawing from economic fields including industrial organization and public finance. Students with an interest in applying basic economic tools to answer real-world questions in the rapidly growing world of sports should strongly consider taking this course. Prereq: ECON 102.
ECON 368	Environmental Economics	3 Units	Economics provides a critically important lens for understanding why environmental problems arise and persist, and the consequences of  efforts to mitigate those problems.  We will apply economics tools to real-world problems, such as:  how can we address climate change without massive job loss? why do markets fail to prevent pollution, and how can government policy do better? Under what circumstances can companies profit by polluting less? What kinds of policies can spur the invention of green technologies? Class sessions will include guest presentations from professionals who are actively working on environmental challenges.  Offered as ECON 368 and ECON 468. Prereq: ECON 102.
ECON 369	Economics of Technological Innovation and Entrepreneurship	3 Units	This course is designed to help students identify, evaluate, and obtain control over technological opportunities so they may successfully understand the challenges of starting new companies. The course focuses on four themes: 1) the source, discovery and evaluation of technological opportunities; 2) the process of organizing a new firm to produce new technology that satisfies the needs of customers; 3) the acquisition of financial and human resources necessary to exploit technological opportunities; and 4) the development of mechanism to appreciate the returns from exploitation of technological opportunities. Prereq: ECON 102.
ECON 372	International Finance	3 Units	This course deals with open-economy macroeconomics and international financial markets, covering open-economy national income analysis, international macroeconomic policy coordination, exchange rate determination, foreign portfolio investment, and global financial crises. Offered as BAFI 372 and ECON 372. Prereq: ECON 103.
ECON 373	International Trade	3 Units	This course deals with international trade theories and policies, covering:  gains from and patterns of trade; immigration; foreign direct investment; protectionism; multilateral trade liberalization; regionalism; and the costs and benefits of globalization within, as well as among, nations. Prereq: ECON 102.
ECON 376	Inside Financial Crises	3 Units	Financial crises throughout history share common elements, though each one contains aspects unique to its own era.  Why do financial systems tend to develop imbalances that lead to bankruptcies and systemic collapse?  What are the linkages that cause spillovers from financial systems to the broader economy?  What tools are available to detect and counter financial pressures before they erupt into economic catastrophe?  This course will examine these issues, by examining several recent financial collapses, including the 2007-2009 global financial crisis.  We consider post-crisis legislative and regulatory responses, and ask whether they are likely to dramatically reduce the odds of another crisis. Prereq: ECON 102 and ECON 103.
ECON 377	Topics in Monetary Policy	3 Units	Central banks have become enormously powerful economic institutions in many countries, yet their purposes and functions are widely misunderstood. This course is designed to enrich one's understanding of how central banks, such as the Federal Reserve System, actually operate; how they have been adapting to changes in the economic and financial landscape; and how they have been adapting to changes in technology. The course will highlight current monetary policy and central banking issues being dealt with in the United States and elsewhere. The course will emphasize the connection between economic theory and the practice of central banking. Where relevant, topics will be examined from a multi-country perspective, so that the practices of several different countries may be compared and contrasted. Prereq: ECON 102 and ECON 103.
ECON 378	Health Care Economics	3 Units	Healthcare accounts for over one-sixth of the U.S. national economy and over one-eighth of its workforce, shares that have dramatically increased over the last 50 years. The rapid growth in healthcare spending has accompanied growing concerns about the quality and efficiency of U.S. healthcare delivery and persistent disparities in access to care. Are these concerns justified? If so, what can policymakers do - and what are they doing - to address them? The purpose of this course is to develop the analytical skills necessary for understanding how the U.S. health care sector operates, how it has evolved, the forces at work behind perceived deficiencies (in access, quality and cost control), and the expected impact of alternative policy proposals. These issues are addressed through the lens of microeconomic theory. Under this framework, outcomes result from the interaction of decisions made by participants in the healthcare economy (e.g. patients, providers, insurers, government), with those decisions governed by the preferences, incentives and resource constraints facing each decision-maker. This course should be of particular interest to students who envision future careers in healthcare delivery, healthcare management, pharmaceutical and device innovation, health insurance or public health, as well as other policy-oriented students seeking to understand the contentious issues in healthcare policymaking. Prereq: ECON 102.
ECON 380	Computational Economics	3 Units	Over the past two decades, computational methods have become an indispensable tool in social science studies. The goal of this course is to introduce undergraduate students to numerical methods and computer implementations for conducting modern quantitative research in economics and social sciences. In this course, we will learn about how to utilize computational methods to conduct research in several different domains, including microeconomics, macroeconomics, financial market, and empirical methods. At the conclusion of this course, students will be able to effectively apply quantitative solution methods to a wide range of economic, financial, and business issues. In addition, students will learn Python as a basic programming language. The learned programming skills will be readily applicable out of classroom. Computational economics will provide students a comprehensive experience and training in economics, computer science, and statistics. Students will be able to distinguish themselves on the job-market, as candidates ready to work in an environment that requires both economics insights and strong quantitative data/computational skills. The course will also be highly useful for students who plan to go to graduate school in either economics, business, finance or statistics. Recommended preparation but not required: basic programming experience (e.g. using Python, R, Matlab, Stata). Prereq: (ECON 102 or ECON 103) and (OPRE 207, ANTH 319, SOCI 307, STAT 201, STAT 243, STAT 312, or STAT 312R).
ECON 386	Urban Economics	3 Units	Microeconomic theory as taught in principles (and even intermediate) does not usually take into account the fact that goods, people, and information must travel in order to interact. Rather, markets are implicitly modeled as if everyone and everything is at a single point in space. In the first part of the course, we will examine the implications of spatial location for economic analysis. In the second part of the class, we will use microeconomic tools to understand urban problems. Topics that we will cover include urban growth, suburbanization, land use, poverty, housing, local government, transportation, education, and crime. Prereq: ECON 102.
ECON 391	Advanced Topics and Writing in Economics	3 Units	This course is characterized by intense yet open-ended intellectual inquiry, guided by reading from primary and secondary sources, and will include extensive practice in written and oral communication.  The focus will be on contemporary economic issues and scholarship, and assumes a high level of ability in undergraduate economics training.  Specifically, this course provides an avenue for an intellectual discourse on some of the most challenging present day economic issues, and we will rigorously think and write about how economic concepts can be applied to virtually any topic, issue and event in the social world.  Students will be challenged throughout the course to think and write like an economist and see the world through the economist's lens. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: (ECON 308 or ECON 309) and (ECON 326 or BAFI 361).
ECON 395	Senior Capstone in Economics	3 Units	This course satisfies the SAGES capstone experience for economics majors, giving students the opportunity to apply their knowledge from previous coursework to conduct economic research in the role of an on-the-job economist. Opportunities to research economic issues on the American economy will be provided in two ways: one through short data analysis projects on various assigned topics and another larger project of original research on a topic of the student's choosing. For the shorter empirical assignments students will take on the role of an economist, whether it be for a company or in public policy. Students will offer both theoretical and empirical analyses of economic issues, both historical and new, such as wage discrimination, determining damages in a court case, analyzing product data for a firm, and analyzing a firm's anticompetitive behavior. For their project of original research, students will identify an applied research problem, determine an appropriate model and methodology, give a review of the literature, gather data, run an economic analysis, and interpret the results. Projects will be presented in writing, orally, and with posters. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: ECON 326 and Junior or Senior standing.
ECON 397	Honors Research I	3 Units	All students admitted to the Honors Program will undertake an independent research project (Senior Thesis) under the guidance of a faculty member (Thesis Advisor).  ECON 397 is used to define the topic, review relevant literature, formulate hypotheses, and collect appropriate data toward completing their research project.  Students will have the responsibility of providing regular progress reports to their thesis advisor highlighting the work accomplished to date, the immediate challenges confronting them, and a plan to complete the project in the time remaining. Prereq: ECON 102, ECON 103, ECON 326 and ECON 308 or ECON 309; Junior standing and minimum GPA of 3.3 in ECON major and 3.0 overall.
ECON 398	Honors Research II	3 Units	This is the second course in a two course sequence to complete the Honors Research Program in Economics. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: A grade of B or higher in ECON 397.
ECON 399	Individual Readings and Research	1 - 6 Units	Intensive examination of a topic selected by the student. A student must receive permission from the program administrator before the start of the term, and permission will only be granted in cases where the student has a clear learning plan and objectives in using the independent readings/research option that cannot be met through available course offerings.
ECON 427	Advanced Econometrics	3 Units	This class builds on the foundations of applied regression analysis developed in ECON 326.  The goal of the class is to equip students with the tools to conduct a causal analysis of a hypothesis in a variety of settings.  Topics will include causality, panel and time series data, instrumental variables and quasi-experiments, semi- and non-parametric methods, and treatment evaluation. Offered as ECON 327 and ECON 427.
ECON 429	Game Theory: The Economics of Thinking Strategically	3 Units	The term "game theory" refers to the set of tools economists use to think about strategic interactions among small groups of individuals and firms.  The primary purpose of this course is to introduce students to the basic concepts of game theory and its applications.  The class will stress the use of game theory as a tool for building models of important economic phenomena.  The class will also include a number of experiments designed to illustrate the game theoretic results, and to highlight how reality may depart from the theory.  The course will stress the value of thinking strategically and provide students with a framework for thinking strategically in their everyday lives.  Rather than approaching each strategic situation they encounter as a unique problem, students will be taught to recognize patterns in the situations they face and to generalize from specific experiences.  A paper on an application of game theory will be required for graduate students. Offered as ECON 329 and ECON 429. Prereq: MBAC 512 or MBAP 406.
ECON 431	Economics of Negotiation and Conflict Resolution	3 Units	Students frequently enroll in a negotiation class with one thought in mind--negotiating a better job offer from an employer. They soon learn, however, that negotiation skills can do far more than improve a paycheck. Negotiations occur everywhere: in marriages, in divorces, in small work teams, in large organizations, in getting a job, in losing a job, in deal making, in decision making, in board rooms, and in court rooms. The remarkable thing about negotiations is that, wherever they occur, they are governed by similar principles. The current wave of corporate restructuring makes the study of negotiations especially important for M.B.A.s. Mergers, acquisitions, downsizing and joint ventures call into question well established business and employment relationships. Navigating these choppy waters by building new relationships requires the negotiation skills that you will learn in this class.  Offered as ECON 431 and ORBH 413.
ECON 438	Law and Economics	3 Units	This course examines legal institutions and rules from an economic perspective. Students will learn when and how legal rules can be efficient. Topics will include property law (including intellectual property), tort law, contracts, and crime.  Offered as ECON 338 and ECON 438. Prereq: MBAC 512 or MBAP 406.
ECON 464	Economic Analysis of Business Strategies	3 Units	This course examines how companies compete against each other and interact with customers in an effort to increase profits.  Topics include: pricing strategies, product differentiation, advertising, R&D strategies, bundling and tie-ins, entry barriers, mergers and acquisitions, collusion and cartels, the dynamics of network industries (e.g. information technology), and technology adoption and diffusion.  The course will take two complementary perspectives.  First, we will consider the point of view of companies, and ask how different business strategies can affect competitive success.  Second, we will consider the perspective of consumers and policymakers: we will ask whether different firm strategies enhance or reduce social welfare, and will explore different policy options to increase welfare (e.g. antitrust policies, patent systems).  The first part of the course will utilize a range of basic economic tools.  In the second part of the course, we will apply what was learned in the first part to real examples of firms and industries, including both business and legal cases. Offered as ECON 364 and ECON 464. Prereq: ECON 102 or MBAC 512 or MBAP 406.
ECON 468	Environmental Economics	3 Units	Economics provides a critically important lens for understanding why environmental problems arise and persist, and the consequences of  efforts to mitigate those problems.  We will apply economics tools to real-world problems, such as:  how can we address climate change without massive job loss? why do markets fail to prevent pollution, and how can government policy do better? Under what circumstances can companies profit by polluting less? What kinds of policies can spur the invention of green technologies? Class sessions will include guest presentations from professionals who are actively working on environmental challenges.  Offered as ECON 368 and ECON 468. Prereq: MBAC 512 or MBAP 406.
ECON 501	Special Problems and Topics	1 - 18 Units	This course is offered, with permission, to students undertaking reading in a field of special interest.
ANEE 107	Introduction to the Ancient Near East and Egypt	3 Units	This is an introduction to the history and culture of the Ancient Near East and Egypt, a land spanning from modern Iraq to Egypt that was home to the earliest known societies in written history. In this course we will learn about the relatively recent discoveries of these ancient civilizations, the first deciphering of their scripts, about the political, social, and cultural history of the peoples who gave rise to the Babylonian, Assyrian, and Egyptian empires (besides other Levantine and Anatolian powers and smaller nations such as Israel). Various aspects of the literary/scientific production of these societies will also be discussed, while reflecting upon their cultural legacy. Offered as ANEE 107 and HSTY 107. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANEE 194	Catapults and Cavalry: Warfare in the Ancient Mediterranean	3 Units	This course examines the development of warfare in the ancient Mediterranean, including the debated origins of war in prehistory, the rise of the great armies of Assyria and Egypt, the heyday of hoplite infantry in Greece, Alexander the Great's vast conquests, and the domination of the Mediterranean by the legions of the Roman Empire. Using written, visual, and archaeological evidence from the ancient Near East, Egypt, Greece, and Rome, we will focus on three main topics: 1) warfare and ancient Mediterranean geopolitics; 2) warfare and innovation, including developments in strategy, tactics, and technology; and 3) the perception and experience of ancient Mediterranean warfare, including social, literary, and artistic responses to violent, interstate conflict. Class sessions will consist primarily of lecture with regular discussion of assigned readings. For the final project, students may either write a traditional research paper or complete a creative project such as building a working scale model of a catapult, reconstructing a historic battle in a video game platform, or creating an educational website or short documentary. All readings are in English. Offered as ANEE 194, CLSC 194, and HSTY 194. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANEE 229	Introduction to Egyptology	3 Units	Have you marveled at how the pyramids were built? Ever wanted to read the Book of the Dead? Or were you always fascinated by mummies, expansive temples and Egyptian gods and goddesses? This course will cover all these topics, and many more, through an exploration of the writings, art, and architecture of the ancient Egyptians. In addition to examining the archaeological remains of Egyptian civilization, the course will incorporate an introduction to translation of hieroglyphs--the written form of the ancient Egyptian language. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANEE 315	Art and Architecture of Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia	3 Units	The golden mask of Tutankhamun, the imposing Ishtar Gate, delicately carved ivories, and expertly chiseled stone sculpture; the art and architecture of Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia are some of the most captivating examples of visual culture from the ancient world. This course will emphasize the examination of art and architecture of Egypt and Mesopotamia in context, focusing on material from prehistory through the 6th century BC. We will explore the deep connection between art, religion, and the worldview of Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, in addition to the meaning and audience for art, the principles which guided art production, trends in media and themes over time, and the relationship of writing and art. We will also consider the interaction between Egyptian and Mesopotamian art, museums and the modern artistic and political landscapes. Offered as ANEE 315, ANEE 415, ARTH 315 and ARTH 415.
ANEE 316	Alexander the Great: Materials and Methods	3 Units	This course is the Classics Departmental Seminar in the SAGES sequence (normally taken in the Spring semester of a major's Junior year), though it can also be taken for regular credit in Classics or History by both undergraduate and graduate students. The seminar offers students a firm grounding in the disciplines of Classics and Ancient Near East and Egyptian Studies with an emphasis on the diverse materials (particularly primary source material), methods and approaches that can be brought to bear on the study of Ancient Near Eastern, Egyptian, and Greco-Roman antiquity. Students will read and discuss the ancient sources and contemporary scholarship on the enigmatic Alexander the Great drawn from various fields of Classics, the Ancient Near East and Egypt, including history, archaeology, art history, philosophy, gender studies, epigraphy, numismatics, and the reception of Alexander. Based upon this, they will then write a research paper that employs conventions found in the field of Classics and Ancient Near East and Egyptian Studies. Much of this training, however, will also be transferable to other fields and periods. Because the scope of the seminar moves (along with Alexander himself) beyond Europe and examines the historical foundations of the antagonism between East and West, this course qualifies as a Global and Cultural Diversity course. Offered as ANEE 316, CLSC 320, CLSC 420, HSTY 320 and HSTY 420. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANEE 320	Gods and Demons in the Ancient Near East and Egypt	3 Units	The roots of many modern religious, literary, social, and political notions reach deep into the fertile soil of Ancient Near Eastern and Egyptian cultures, which developed as early as the fourth millennium BCE and flourished until the Hellenistic period. In this course we will examine various components of the religious, divinatory and magical systems of these cultures, and reflect upon their relationship with the stories that are found in the Hebrew Bible. We will learn (through a critical analysis of a selection of ancient texts) about ancient Mesopotamian and Egyptian deities, demons, myths, and magical rituals. We will also explore notions of creation, cosmic order, the human condition, death, afterlife, divine favor, and a wide variety of beliefs that, while often contradictory to modern ways of thinking, combined into unified religious systems. Offered as ANEE 320, RLGN 320 and RLGN 420.
ANEE 337	Ancient Medicine	3 Units	This course offers a general survey of the history of medicine from its origins in pre-historical times to Galen (2nd c. CE) with a view to gaining a better understanding of the path that eventually lead to modern medical practice. The various medical systems considered, including the ancient Babylonian, Egyptian, Jewish, Chinese, Ayurvedic, Greek and Roman traditions, will be examined through the study of primary and secondary sources, while key conceptual developments and practices are identified within their cultural and social context. Special issues, such as epidemics, women's medicine, and surgery, are also explored and discussed. Offered as ANEE 337, CLSC 337, CLSC 437, HSTY 337, and HSTY 437. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANEE 344	Archaeology of the Ancient World	3 Units	This course examines the great civilizations of the ancient world, particularly those of the Ancient Near East, Egypt, Greece and Rome, through the archaeological record. Each of these geographic areas and their respective cultures will be individually explored, but also examined within a broader historical context. Particular focus will be placed on the social, political, religious, and economic ideas that were exchanged across Mesopotamia, Anatolia, the Levant and the Mediterranean and the influence this interconnectivity had on these ancient societies.  Offered as ANEE 344, ANEE 444, ANTH 344, ANTH 444, ARTH 344, ARTH 444, CLSC 344 and CLSC 444. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANEE 381	Ancient Near East & Egypt Senior Capstone	3 Units	The capstone is the final requirement of the SAGES program and is normally taken in the fall semester of a student's senior year. It involves researching and writing an independent-study paper of at least 25 pages on a topic relating to Ancient Near Eastern and/or Egyptian history/culture chosen in consultation with the student's capstone advisor, who will regularly review its progress. For the capstone project, students employ, integrate, and demonstrate analytical, rhetorical, and practical writing skills developed and honed through the SAGES curriculum as well as their major or minor studies. The Capstone Project requires both a written and an oral component (i.e., a twenty-minute oral and visual (normally PowerPoint) presentation of project with argumentation is required). The product of the capstone may take different forms: there will always be a written component, but other forms of expression are also encouraged, such as a webpage or poster for a poster session. As for the kind of project that might be done, the list is nearly endless, but by way of example students interested in history might work on an historical problem, those interested science might work on topics in medicine or astronomy, those interested in art history might work on an art historical topic, those interested in literature might work on an annotated translation of a text, those interested in archaeology might produce a virtual exhibit centered on a specific site or problem, etc. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: ANEE 107 and ANEE 316.
ANEE 415	Art and Architecture of Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia	3 Units	The golden mask of Tutankhamun, the imposing Ishtar Gate, delicately carved ivories, and expertly chiseled stone sculpture; the art and architecture of Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia are some of the most captivating examples of visual culture from the ancient world. This course will emphasize the examination of art and architecture of Egypt and Mesopotamia in context, focusing on material from prehistory through the 6th century BC. We will explore the deep connection between art, religion, and the worldview of Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, in addition to the meaning and audience for art, the principles which guided art production, trends in media and themes over time, and the relationship of writing and art. We will also consider the interaction between Egyptian and Mesopotamian art, museums and the modern artistic and political landscapes. Offered as ANEE 315, ANEE 415, ARTH 315 and ARTH 415.
ANEE 444	Archaeology of the Ancient World	3 Units	This course examines the great civilizations of the ancient world, particularly those of the Ancient Near East, Egypt, Greece and Rome, through the archaeological record. Each of these geographic areas and their respective cultures will be individually explored, but also examined within a broader historical context. Particular focus will be placed on the social, political, religious, and economic ideas that were exchanged across Mesopotamia, Anatolia, the Levant and the Mediterranean and the influence this interconnectivity had on these ancient societies.  Offered as ANEE 344, ANEE 444, ANTH 344, ANTH 444, ARTH 344, ARTH 444, CLSC 344 and CLSC 444. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
EDUC 200	Introduction to Supplemental Instruction (SI)	1 Unit	This course is designed to develop and reinforce skills necessary for facilitating Supplemental Instruction through the use of pedagogical knowledge, Instructional strategies, understanding of learning theory, understanding the principles and techniques of differentiated Instruction, and understanding group dynamics. Prereq: Cumulative GPA of 3.25.
EDUC 255	Literacy Across the Content Areas	3 Units	Literacy development is examined through various perspectives.  This three hour course emphasizes understanding reading and writing as it applies to the various content areas.  The course includes instruction in using protocols for oral language development, strategies for word skill development and reading comprehension, strategies for addressing dyslexia, and use of assessment of reading skills.  Students apply strategies through various field experiences.
EDUC 301	Introduction to Education	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to the historical, sociological, and philosophical role of education in a diverse society.  Historic and contemporary practices and issues are introduced and explored within the context of educational ideologies.  Emphases include examination of what success in education means and beginning the process of defining one's own identity as a teacher. Offered as EDUC 301 and EDUC 401.
EDUC 304	Educational Psychology	3 Units	Application of psychological principles as they relate to various educational learning theories.  Principles and practices of measurement and evaluation.  Learning developmental differences between child, adolescent, and young adult growth. Continuation of professional development.  Application of research to instructional methodologies.  Clinical/Field experiences required. Research project required for graduate students. Recommended preparation: PSCL 101. Offered as EDUC 304 and EDUC 404.
EDUC 325	Content Area Special Methods I	3 Units	This methods course, designed for licensure candidates in secondary or multi-age areas, specifically emphasizes the methods inherent in teaching the subject area of licensure. The first of two courses, EDUC 325 builds on the student's previous understanding of the methods involved in teaching their particular subject. The course will consist of weekly guided observations in a local high school classroom under the mentoring of a master teacher, various forms of exploring content and pedagogy, and monthly discussions in a special format called the "Reflective Triad" - composed of each CWRU student, his/her master teacher in the high school, and a CWRU faculty member in the content area. Additionally, the course involves introductory lesson design and teaching. Prereq: EDUC 301, EDUC 304.
EDUC 326	Content Area Special Methods II	3 Units	This methods course, designed for licensure candidates in secondary or multi-age areas, specifically emphasizes the methods inherent in teaching the subject area of licensure. This course is a continuation of the sequence and is the second of two courses. EDUC 326 continues students' work in the first seminar to understand, design and teach their content. The course consists of weekly guided observations in a local high school classroom under the mentoring of a master teacher, various forms of exploring content and pedagogy, and monthly discussions in a special format called the "Reflective Triad" - composed of each CWRU student, his/her master teacher in the high school, and a CWRU faculty member in the content area. Additionally, the course involves more sophisticated lesson design in the content area, content integration, an introduction to designing instruction to meet the needs of diverse learners, and teaching. Prereq: EDUC 301, EDUC 304, EDUC 325.
EDUC 336	The Diverse Learner: Best Practice for Effective Classrooms	3 Units	Building on the theories of human development and learning encompassed in EDUC 304, this course guides students to develop a deeper understanding of theories and research in human development, of issues related to adolescents, and how they are applied in today's classrooms.  Mental health issues, exceptions in learning and inclusion theory will be focal points for the course. Offered as EDUC 336 and EDUC 436. Prereq: EDUC 304.
EDUC 338	Seminar and Practicum in Adolescents	3 Units	Supervised field placement and attendance in early childhood, child and adolescent settings including preschools, schools, hospitals, and neighborhood centers.  This course is an elective.  Recommended preparation: PSCL 101.   Offered as EDUC 338, PSCL 338 and SOCI 338.
EDUC 340	Advanced Curriculum and Methods	3 Units	This curriculum and methods course is offered for students enrolled in the high school or Multi-Age Languages teacher licensure program.  It involves in-depth study of pedagogy within an integrated and interdisciplinary model.  Demonstrated understanding of constructivist theory, the application of developmental and learning theories, and state and national standards in curriculum content, curriculum design, instruction and assessment are central to the course. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: EDUC 301, EDUC 304, EDUC 325, EDUC 326.
EDUC 386	Introduction to Instructional Technology	2 - 3 Units	This course is designed to address the basic technology skills, which are required of all teachers. The course uses both concept and project based learning activities. Each of the projects is centered on a set of activities designed to allow students to demonstrate a particular subset of competencies. The course will not always provide step-by-step directions for completing projects; instead it will promote the use of existing information and help resources to allow students to develop the ability to learn new technology independently. Each of the projects will also contain the opportunity for the student to reflect on how technology impacts their teaching. Course projects are designed to assess both a basic comfort level with learning and using technology tools and the student's ability to apply technology to improve teaching and learning. The nature of the course is a mix of technology and should engage teachers in thinking about ways to improve their teaching.  There is an option for non-education majors to enroll for two credits. Offered as EDUC 386 and EDUC 486.
EDUC 390	Student Teaching & Professional Development Seminar	3 Units	This course is taken in conjunction with student teaching and provides a forum for processing what students experience throughout the semester. Additionally, the course guides the professional development of each student. The course helps students integrate state and national standards in their teaching. The Teacher Performance Assessment (TPA) is addressed in this course and becomes part of the student teaching portfolio. Individual advisement is a critical component and involves resume writing, interview skills, job placement information and preparation for state mandated licensure exams. Prereq: EDUC 301, EDUC 304, EDUC 325, EDUC 326, EDUC 340.  Coreq: EDUC 394 - Student Teaching Practicum - is taken in conjunction with the Student Teaching Seminar.
EDUC 390C	Student Teaching Capstone & Professional Development Seminar	3 Units	This course is taken in conjunction with student teaching and emphasizes the integration of theory and practice.  The course provides a forum for processing what students experience throughout the semester as students engage in full-time work in the classroom.   The course also includes components that fulfill the SAGES Senior Capstone requirement.  The course guides the professional development of each student as he or she compiles the portfolio, completes the Capstone, and prepares for state licensure exams. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: EDUC 255, EDUC 386, EDUC 340. Coreq: EDUC 394.
EDUC 394	Student Teaching Practicum	3 - 9 Units	This practicum represents a student teaching experience involving curriculum design and implementation. Each student teacher plans and teaches a comprehensive unit, moving from guided practice to assuming full teacher responsibility within the school culture. Video analysis, pre- and post-teaching lesson analyses, problem-solving, and reflective dialogue are key emphases of the practicum. The Teacher Performance Assessment is a component of the student teaching for education majors.
EDUC 395	Independent Study in Education	1 - 3 Units	Independent Study in Education is offered for students with special interests and/or commitments that are not fully addressed in other education courses and who wish to work independently.
EDUC 401	Introduction to Education	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to the historical, sociological, and philosophical role of education in a diverse society.  Historic and contemporary practices and issues are introduced and explored within the context of educational ideologies.  Emphases include examination of what success in education means and beginning the process of defining one's own identity as a teacher. Offered as EDUC 301 and EDUC 401.
EDUC 404	Educational Psychology	3 Units	Application of psychological principles as they relate to various educational learning theories.  Principles and practices of measurement and evaluation.  Learning developmental differences between child, adolescent, and young adult growth. Continuation of professional development.  Application of research to instructional methodologies.  Clinical/Field experiences required. Research project required for graduate students. Recommended preparation: PSCL 101. Offered as EDUC 304 and EDUC 404.
EDUC 436	The Diverse Learner: Best Practice for Effective Classrooms	3 Units	Building on the theories of human development and learning encompassed in EDUC 304, this course guides students to develop a deeper understanding of theories and research in human development, of issues related to adolescents, and how they are applied in today's classrooms.  Mental health issues, exceptions in learning and inclusion theory will be focal points for the course. Offered as EDUC 336 and EDUC 436. Prereq: EDUC 404.
EDUC 486	Introduction to Instructional Technology	2 - 3 Units	This course is designed to address the basic technology skills, which are required of all teachers. The course uses both concept and project based learning activities. Each of the projects is centered on a set of activities designed to allow students to demonstrate a particular subset of competencies. The course will not always provide step-by-step directions for completing projects; instead it will promote the use of existing information and help resources to allow students to develop the ability to learn new technology independently. Each of the projects will also contain the opportunity for the student to reflect on how technology impacts their teaching. Course projects are designed to assess both a basic comfort level with learning and using technology tools and the student's ability to apply technology to improve teaching and learning. The nature of the course is a mix of technology and should engage teachers in thinking about ways to improve their teaching.  There is an option for non-education majors to enroll for two credits. Offered as EDUC 386 and EDUC 486.
EDUC 495	Independent Study in Education	1 - 3 Units	Independent Study in Education is offered for students with special interests and/or commitments that are not fully addressed in other education courses and who wish to work independently.
HIER 101	Introduction to Ancient Egyptian Language and Literature I	3 Units	This is the first course in a two-semester sequence that introduces students to the fundamentals of ancient Egyptian hieroglyphic script, grammar, and syntax from the Middle Egyptian period, the classical phase of the ancient Egyptian language that developed around 2000 BCE and persisted as the standard hieroglyphic language for the remainder of ancient Egyptian history. While learning the syntax and grammar, students will also be exposed to ancient Egyptian literature and culture.
HIER 102	Introduction to Ancient Egyptian Language and Literature II	3 Units	This is the second course in a two-semester sequence that introduces students to the fundamentals of ancient Egyptian hieroglyphic script, grammar, and syntax from the Middle Egyptian period, the classical phase of the ancient Egyptian language that developed around 2000 BCE and persisted as the standard hieroglyphic language for the remainder of ancient Egyptian history. While learning the syntax and grammar, students will also be exposed to ancient Egyptian literature and culture. Prereq: HIER 101.
ECSE 132	Programming in Java	3 Units	An in-depth survey of modern programming language features, computer programming and algorithmic problem solving with an emphasis on the Java language. Computers and code compilation; conditional statements, subprograms, loops, methods; object-oriented design, inheritance and polymorphism, abstract classes and interfaces; types, type systems, generic types, abstract data types, strings, arrays, linked lists; software development, modular code design, unit testing; strings, text and file I/O; GUI components, GUI event handling; threads; comparison of Java to C, C++, and C#. Offered as CSDS 132 and ECSE 132. Counts for CAS Quantitative Reasoning Requirement.
ECSE 216	Fundamental System Concepts	3 Units	Develops framework for addressing problems in science and engineering that require an integrated, interdisciplinary approach, including the effective management of complexity and uncertainty.  Introduces fundamental system concepts in an integrated framework.  Properties and behavior of phenomena regardless of the physical implementation through a focus on the structure and logic of information flow.  Systematic problem solving methodology using systems concepts. Recommended preparation: MATH 224.
ECSE 233	Introduction to Data Structures	4 Units	Different representations of data: lists, stacks and queues, trees, graphs, and files.  Manipulation of data: searching and sorting, hashing, recursion and higher order functions.  Abstract data types, templating, and the separation of interface and implementation.  Introduction to asymptotic analysis. The Java language is used to illustrate the concepts and as an implementation vehicle throughout the course. Offered as CSDS 233 and ECSE 233. Prereq: ECSE 132.
ECSE 245	Electronic Circuits	4 Units	Analysis of time-dependent electrical circuits.  Dynamic waveforms and elements: inductors, capacitors, and transformers.  First- and second-order circuits, passive and active.  Analysis of sinusoidal steady state response using phasors.  Laplace transforms and pole-zero diagrams.  S-domain circuit analysis.  Two-port networks, impulse response, and transfer functions.  Introduction to nonlinear semiconductor devices: diodes, BJTs, and FETs.  Gain-bandwidth product, slew-rate and other limitations of real devices.  SPICE simulation and laboratory exercises reinforce course materials. Prereq: ENGR 210.  Prereq or Coreq: MATH 224.
ECSE 246	Signals and Systems	4 Units	Mathematical representation, characterization, and analysis of continuous-time signals and systems.  Development of elementary mathematical models of continuous-time dynamic systems.  Time domain and frequency domain analysis of linear time-invariant systems.  Fourier series, Fourier transforms, and Laplace transforms.  Sampling theorem.  Filter design.  Introduction to feedback control systems and feedback controller design. Prereq: ENGR 210.  Prereq or Coreq: MATH 224.
ECSE 275	Fundamentals of Robotics	4 Units	The Fundamentals of Robotics course will expose students to fundamental principles of robotics.  Students will explore high level conceptual foundations of robotics beginning with Braitenberg vehicles and apply this knowledge to simulated and physical robot hardware in laboratory experiences and in a final project.  Laboratory experiences will guide students through applying theory to practice increasingly complex tasks in a project oriented, group work environment.  The course culminates in a robotics challenge project at the end of the semester.  Topics covered are: sensors, actuators, kinematics, control, planning and programming.  Programming languages and concepts (e.g., C++, object oriented programming) used in robotics will be introduced and used with modern robotics programming toolboxes and frameworks.  Prior experience with these languages will not be necessary.  Previous experience with robotics is not required for this course. Offered as CSDS 275 and ECSE 275. Prereq: (ENGR 131 or ECSE 132) and PHYS 121 and MATH 121.
ECSE 281	Logic Design and Computer Organization	4 Units	Fundamentals of digital systems in terms of both computer organization and logic level design.  Organization of digital computers; information representation; boolean algebra; analysis and synthesis of combinational and sequential circuits; datapaths and register transfers; instruction sets and assembly language; input/output and communication; memory. Offered as CSDS 281 and ECSE 281. Prereq: ENGR 131 or ECSE 132.
ECSE 290	Introduction to Computer Game Design and Implementation	3 Units	This class begins with an examination of the history of video games and of game design. Games will be examined in a systems context to understand gaming and game design fundamentals. Various topics relating directly to the implementation of computer games will be introduced including graphics, animation, artificial intelligence, user interfaces, the simulation of motion, sound generation, and networking. Extensive study of past and current computer games will be used to illustrate course concepts. Individual and group projects will be used throughout the semester to motivate, illustrate and demonstrate the course concepts and ideas. Group game development and implementation projects will culminate in classroom presentation and evaluation. Offered as CSDS 290 and ECSE 290. Prereq: ECSE 132.
ECSE 301	Digital Logic Laboratory	2 Units	This course is an introductory experimental laboratory for digital networks. The course introduces students to the process of design, analysis, synthesis and implementation of digital networks. The course covers the design of combinational circuits, sequential networks, registers, counters, synchronous/asynchronous Finite State Machines, register based design, and arithmetic computational blocks. Prereq: ECSE 281.
ECSE 302	Discrete Mathematics	3 Units	A general introduction to basic mathematical terminology and the techniques of abstract mathematics in the context of discrete mathematics. Topics introduced are mathematical reasoning, Boolean connectives, deduction, mathematical induction, sets, functions and relations, algorithms, graphs, combinatorial reasoning. Offered as CSDS 302, ECSE 302 and MATH 304. Prereq: MATH 122 or MATH 124 or MATH 126.
ECSE 303	Embedded Systems Design and Laboratory	3 Units	The purpose of this Course and Laboratory is to expose and train the students in modern embedded systems software and hardware design techniques and practices including networking and mobile connectivity. The rationale for the Course and Lab is based on the explosive growth of embedded systems in the industry, specifically industrial automation, aviation, surveillance, medical devices, but also common consumer products.  The course topics cover a wide range of material as follows. Microcontroller systems based on the ARM processor. Essential components, memories, busses interfaces. Devices, peripherals, GPIOs, device drivers. Sensors and Actuators, A/D, D/A, DSP. Embedded Linux, kernels, kernel modules, compilers and assemblers. Libraries, and debugging facilities.   The Lab will be based on common platforms such as Raspberry pi, Arduino, ARM embed, supported by a network of Linux workstations.
ECSE 304	Control Engineering I with Laboratory	3 Units	Analysis and design techniques for control applications. Linearization of nonlinear systems. Design specifications. Classical design methods: root locus, bode, nyquist. PID, lead, lag, lead-lag controller design. State space modeling, solution, controllability, observability and stability. Modeling and control demonstrations and experiments single-input/single-output and multivariable systems. Control system analysis/design/implementation software.  The course will incorporate the use of Grand Challenges in the areas of Energy Systems, Control Systems, and Data Analytics in order to provide a framework for problems to study in the development and application of the concepts and tools studied in the course. Various aspects of important engineering skills relating to leadership, teaming, emotional intelligence, and effective communication are integrated into the course. Prereq: ECSE 246 or EMAE 350.
ECSE 305	Control Engineering I Laboratory	1 Unit	A laboratory course based on the material in ECSE 304.  Modeling, simulation, and analysis using MATLAB. Physical experiments involving control of mechanical systems, process control systems, and design of PID controllers. Coreq: ECSE 304.
ECSE 309	Electromagnetic Fields I	3 Units	Maxwell's integral and differential equations, boundary conditions, constitutive relations, energy conservation and Poynting vector, wave equation, plane waves, propagating waves and transmission lines, characteristic impedance, reflection coefficient and standing wave ratio, in-depth analysis of coaxial and strip lines, electro- and magneto-quasistatics, simple boundary value problems, correspondence between fields and circuit concepts, energy and forces. Prereq: PHYS 122 or PHYS 124.  Prereq or Coreq: MATH 224.
ECSE 313	Signal Processing	3 Units	Fourier series and transforms. Analog and digital filters. Fast-Fourier transforms, sampling, and modulation for discrete time signals and systems. Consideration of stochastic signals and linear processing of stochastic signals using correlation functions and spectral analysis.  The course will incorporate the use of Grand Challenges in the areas of Energy Systems, Control Systems, and Data Analytics in order to provide a framework for problems to study in the development and application of the concepts and tools studied in the course. Various aspects of important engineering skills relating to leadership, teaming, emotional intelligence, and effective communication are integrated into the course. Prereq: ECSE 246.
ECSE 314	Computer Architecture	3 Units	This course provides students the opportunity to study and evaluate a modern computer architecture design.  The course covers topics in fundamentals of computer design, performance, cost, instruction set design, processor implementation, control unit, pipelining, communication and network, memory hierarchy, computer arithmetic, input-output, and an introduction to RISC and super-scalar processors. Offered as CSDS 314 and ECSE 314. Prereq: ECSE 281.
ECSE 315	Digital Systems Design	4 Units	This course gives students the ability to design modern digital circuits.  The course covers topics in logic level analysis and synthesis, digital electronics: transistors, CMOS logic gates, CMOS lay-out, design metrics space, power, delay. Programmable logic (partitioning, routing), state machine analysis and synthesis, register transfer level block design, datapath, controllers, ASM charts, microsequencers, emulation and rapid protyping, and switch/logic-level simulation. Prereq: ECSE 281.
ECSE 316	Wireless Communications	3 Units	This course introduces the fundamentals of wireless communications including backgrounds, important concepts, and cutting-edge technologies. In particular, the course focuses on interesting and important topics in wireless communications, such as (but not limited to): Overview of wireless communication networks and protocols, the cellular concept, system design fundamentals, brief introduction to wireless physical layer fundamentals, multiple access control protocols for wireless systems, wireless networking (routing/rerouting, wireless TCP/IP), mobility management, call admission control and resource allocation, revolution/evolution towards future generation wireless networks, overview of wireless mesh networks, mobile ad hoc networks and wireless sensor networks, and wireless security (optional). Offered as ECSE 316 and ECSE 414. Prereq: ECSE 351 with a C or better or a Graduate student.
ECSE 317	Computer Design - FPGAs	3 Units	The aim is to expose the student to methodologies for systematic design of digital systems with emphasis on programmable logic implementations and prototyping. The course requires a number of hands-on experiments and an overall lab project.  The lab involves a number of class lectures to familiarize the students with the modern design techniques based on VHDL/Verilog Hardware Design Languages, CAD tools, and FPGAs.  Offered as ECSE 317 and ECSE 417. Prereq: ECSE 281.
ECSE 318	VLSI/CAD	4 Units	With Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) technology there is an increased need for Computer-Aided Design (CAD) techniques and tools to help in the design of large digital systems that deliver both performance and functionality.  Such high performance tools are of great importance in the VLSI design process, both to perform functional, logical, and behavioral modeling and verification to aid the testing process. This course discusses the fundamentals in behavioral languages, both VHDL and Verilog, with hands-on experience. Prereq: ECSE 281 and ECSE 315.
ECSE 319	Applied Probability and Stochastic Processes for Biology	3 Units	Applications of probability and stochastic processes to biological systems. Mathematical topics will include: introduction to discrete and continuous probability spaces (including numerical generation of pseudo random samples from specified probability distributions), Markov processes in discrete and continuous time with discrete and continuous sample spaces, point processes including homogeneous and inhomogeneous Poisson processes and Markov chains on graphs, and diffusion processes including Brownian motion and the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process.  Biological topics will be determined by the interests of the students and the instructor.  Likely topics include: stochastic ion channels, molecular motors and stochastic ratchets, actin and tubulin polymerization, random walk models for neural spike trains, bacterial chemotaxis, signaling and genetic regulatory networks, and stochastic predator-prey dynamics.  The emphasis will be on practical simulation and analysis of stochastic phenomena in biological systems.  Numerical methods will be developed using a combination of MATLAB, the R statistical package, MCell, and/or URDME, at the discretion of the instructor.  Student projects will comprise a major part of the course. Offered as BIOL 319, ECSE 319, MATH 319, SYBB 319, BIOL 419, EBME 419, MATH 419, PHOL 419, and SYBB 419. Prereq: (MATH 224 or MATH 223) and (BIOL 300 or BIOL 306) and (MATH 201 or MATH 307).
ECSE 321	Semiconductor Electronic Devices	4 Units	Energy bands and charge carriers in semiconductors and their experimental verifications.  Excess carriers in semiconductors.  Principles of operation of semiconductor devices that rely on the electrical properties of semiconductor surfaces and junctions.  Development of equivalent circuit models and performance limitations of these devices.  Devices covered include: junctions, bipolar transistors, Schottky junctions, MOS capacitors, junction gate and MOS field effect transistors, optical devices such as photodetectors, light-emitting diodes, solar cells, and lasers. Prereq: PHYS 122.  Prereq or Coreq: MATH 224.
ECSE 322	Integrated Circuits and Electronic Devices	3 Units	Technology of monolithic integrated circuits and devices, including crystal growth and doping, photolithography, vacuum technology, metalization, wet etching, thin film basics, oxidation, diffusion, ion implantation, epitaxy, chemical vapor deposition, plasma processing, and micromachining. Basics of semiconductor devices including junction diodes, bipolar junction transistors, and field effect transistors. Prereq: PHYS 122.  Prereq or Coreq: MATH 224.
ECSE 324	Modeling and Simulation of Continuous Dynamical Systems	3 Units	This course examines the computer-based modeling and simulation of continuous dynamical system behavior in a variety of systems including electric power systems, industrial control systems, and signal processing that are represented by a set of differential equations need to be solved numerically in order to compute and represent their behavior for study. In addition to these applications, there are many other important applications of these tools in computer games, virtual worlds, weather forecasting, and population models, to name a few examples. Numerical integration techniques are developed to perform these computations. Multiple computational engines such as Matlab, Simulink, Unity, and physics engines etc. are also examined as examples of commonly used software to solve for and visualize continuous-time system behavior.    The course will incorporate the use of Grand Challenges in the areas of Energy Systems, Control Systems, and Data Analytics in order to provide motivation and a framework for problems to study in the development and application of the concepts and tools studied in the course. Various aspects of important engineering skills relating to leadership, teaming, emotional intelligence, and effective communication are integrated into the course. Prereq: MATH 224.
ECSE 326	Instrumentation Electronics	3 Units	A second course in instrumentation with emphasis on sensor interface electronics. General concepts in measurement systems, including accuracy, precision, sensitivity, linearity, and resolution. The physics and modeling of resistive, reactive, self-generating, and direct-digital sensors. Signal conditioning for same, including bridge circuits, coherent detectors, and a variety of amplifier topologies: differential, instrumentation, charge, and transimpedance. Noise and drift in amplifiers and resistors. Practical issues of interference, including grounding, shielding, supply/return, and isolation amplifiers. Prereq: ENGR 210 and (ECSE 246 or EBME 308 or EMAE 350).
ECSE 337	Compiler Design	4 Units	Design and implementation of compilers and other language processors. Scanners and lexical analysis; regular expressions and finite automata; scanner generators; parsers and syntax analysis; context free grammars; parser generators; semantic analysis; intermediate code generation; runtime environments; code generation; machine independent optimizations; data flow and dependence analysis. There will be a significant programming project involving the use of compiler tools and software development tools and techniques. Offered as CSDS 337 and ECSE 337. Prereq: ECSE 233 and ECSE 281.
ECSE 338	Intro to Operating Systems and Concurrent Programming	4 Units	Intro to OS: OS Structures, processes, threads, CPU scheduling, deadlocks, memory management, file system implementations, virtual machines, cloud computing. Concurrent programming: fork, join, concurrent statement, critical section problem, safety and liveness properties of concurrent programs, process synchronization algorithms, semaphores, monitors.  UNIX systems programming: system calls, UNIX System V IPCs, threads, RPCs, shell programming. Offered as CSDS 338, ECSE, 338, CSDS 338N and ECSE 338N. Prereq: Computer Science Major or Minor and ECSE 233 with a C or higher.
ECSE 338N	Intro to Operating Systems and Concurrent Programming	4 Units	Intro to OS: OS Structures, processes, threads, CPU scheduling, deadlocks, memory management, file system implementations, virtual machines, cloud computing. Concurrent programming: fork, join, concurrent statement, critical section problem, safety and liveness properties of concurrent programs, process synchronization algorithms, semaphores, monitors.  UNIX systems programming: system calls, UNIX System V IPCs, threads, RPCs, shell programming. Offered as CSDS 338, ECSE, 338, CSDS 338N and ECSE 338N. Prereq: ECSE 233 with a C or higher.
ECSE 342	Introduction to Global Issues	3 Units	This systems course is based on the paradigm of the world as a complex system.  Global issues such as population, world trade and financial markets, resources (energy, water, land), global climate change, and others are considered with particular emphasis put on their mutual interdependence.  A reasoning support computer system which contains extensive data and a family of models is used for future assessment.  Students are engaged in individual, custom-tailored, projects of creating conditions for a desirable or sustainable future based on data and scientific knowledge available.  Students at CWRU will interact with students from fifteen universities that have been strategically selected in order to give global coverage to UNESCO'S Global-problematique Education Network Initiative (GENIe) in joint, participatory scenario analysis via the internet.
ECSE 342I	Global Issues, Health, & Sustainability in India	3 Units	Global Issues, Health, & Sustainability in India is an interdisciplinary social work and engineering collaboration that includes a short-term cross-cultural immersion.  This course brings together social work (knowledge, values, and skills) and health care (promotion, education, and community) perspectives to the understanding of technical project assessment, selection, planning and implementation in India.  The course is also designed to help students understand culturally relevant community engagement strategies to ensure project acceptance in underserved and developing communities. Many field sites will be visited in order to observe first-hand the community assessment and development of projects that engineers implement. An example of these projects could include infrastructure to support green energy and water (resource planning, development, conservation, and sanitation).   This study abroad course will acquaint students with history and culture of India, its social, political and economic development and the impact it has on health and the delivery of social services. Participants will learn about factors affecting the abilities to reach, treat, educate, and equip communities to improve health outcomes. Engineering students will learn the quantitative aspects using a paradigm of hierarchical systems, mathematical modeling, and scenario analysis using a 'reasoning support' system.  Together the engineering, social work, and health sciences students in disciplinary-balanced teams  will jointly work on real and meaningful projects marrying the descriptive scenarios (that is the 'subjective' aspect) with the numerical scenario analysis based on mathematical modeling (or 'objective' aspect) to form a coherent view of the future. The course will be taught using both lecture and experiential modalities. Engineering students will conduct computer modeling work. Along with visiting a variety of governmental and non-governmental institutions, organizations and projects, students will visit historical sites and attend cultural events. Offered as ECSE 342I and SASS 375I. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ECSE 344	Electronic Analysis and Design	3 Units	The design and analysis of real-world circuits. Topics include: junction diodes, non-ideal op-amp models, characteristics and models for large and small signal operation of bipolar junction transistors (BJTs) and field effect transistors (FETs), selection of operating point and biasing for BJT and FET amplifiers. Hybrid-pi model and other advanced circuit models, cascaded amplifiers, negative feedback, differential amplifiers, oscillators, tuned circuits, and phase-locked loops. Computers will be extensively used to model circuits. Selected experiments and/or laboratory projects. Prereq: ECSE 245.
ECSE 346	Engineering Optimization	3 Units	Optimization techniques including linear programming and extensions; transportation and assignment problems; network flow optimization; quadratic, integer, and separable programming; geometric programming; and dynamic programming. Nonlinear optimization topics: optimality criteria, gradient and other practical unconstrained and constrained methods. Computer applications using engineering and business case studies.   The course will incorporate the use of Grand Challenges in the areas of Energy Systems, Control Systems, and Data Analytics in order to provide a framework for problems to study in the development and application of the concepts and tools studied in the course. Various aspects of important engineering skills relating to leadership, teaming, emotional intelligence, and effective communication are integrated into the course. Recommended preparation: MATH 201.
ECSE 350	Operations and Systems Design	3 Units	Introduction to design, modeling, and optimization of operations and scheduling systems with applications to computer science and engineering problems. Topics include, forecasting and time series, strategic, tactical, and operational planning, life cycle analysis, learning curves, resources allocation, materials requirement and capacity planning, sequencing, scheduling, inventory control, project management and planning. Tools for analysis include: multi-objective optimization, queuing models, simulation, and artificial intelligence.
ECSE 351	Communications and Signal Analysis	3 Units	Fourier transform analysis and sampling of signals.  AM, FM and SSB modulation and other modulation methods such as pulse code, delta, pulse position, PSK and FSK.  Detection, multiplexing, performance evaluation in terms of signal-to-noise ratio and bandwidth requirements. Prereq: ECSE 246 or requisites not met permission.
ECSE 352	Engineering Economics and Decision Analysis	3 Units	Economic analysis of engineering projects, focusing on financial decisions concerning capital investments. Present worth, annual worth, internal rate of return, benefit/cost ratio. Replacement and abandonment policies, effects of taxes, and inflation. Decision making under risk and uncertainty. Decision trees. Value of information.  The course will incorporate the use of Grand Challenges in the areas of Energy Systems, Control Systems, and Data Analytics in order to provide a framework for problems to study in the development and application of the concepts and tools studied in the course. Various aspects of important engineering skills relating to leadership, teaming, emotional intelligence, and effective communication are integrated into the course.
ECSE 354	Digital Communications	3 Units	Fundamental bounds on transmission of information. Signal representation in vector space. Optimum reception. Probability and random processes with application to noise problems, speech encoding using linear prediction. Shaping of base-band signal spectra, correlative coding and equalization. Comparative analysis of digital modulation schemes. Concepts of information theory and coding. Applications to data communication. Prereq: ECSE 246 or requisites not met permission.
ECSE 360	Manufacturing and Automated Systems	3 Units	Formulation, modeling, planning, and control of manufacturing and automated systems with applications to computer science and engineering problems. Topics include, design of products and processes, location/spatial problems, transportation and assignment, product and process layout, group technology and clustering, cellular and network flow layouts, computer control systems, reliability and maintenance, and statistical quality control. Tools and analysis include: multi-objective optimization, artificial intelligence, and heuristics for combinatorial problems. Offered as ECSE 360 and ECSE 460.
ECSE 366	Computer Graphics	3 Units	Theory and practice of computer graphics: object and environment representation including coordinate transformations image extraction including perspective, hidden surface, and shading algorithms; and interaction.  Covers a wide range of graphic display devices and systems with emphasis in interactive shaded graphics. Offered as CSDS 366, ECSE 366, CSDS 466 and ECSE 466. Prereq: ECSE 233.
ECSE 368	Power System Analysis I	3 Units	This course introduces the steady-state modeling and analysis of electric power systems. The course discusses the modeling of essential power system network components such as transformers and transmission lines. The course also discusses important steady-state analysis of three-phase power system network, such as the power flow and economic operation studies. Through the use of PowerWorld Simulator education software, further understanding and knowledge can be gained on the operational characteristics of AC power systems. Special topics concerning new grid technologies will be discussed towards the semester end. The prerequisite requirements of the course include the concepts and computational techniques of Alternative Current (AC) circuit and electromagnetic field. Offered as ECSE 368 and ECSE 468. Prereq: ECSE 245.
ECSE 369	Power System Analysis II	3 Units	This course extends upon the steady state analysis of power systems to cover study topics that are essential for power system planning and operation. Special system operating conditions are considered, such as unbalanced network operation and component faults. Among the most important analytical methods developed, are symmetrical components and sequence networks. Other study topics discussed include the electric machine modeling and power system transient stability. The latter half of the course presents computational methods and control algorithms that are essential for power system operation, such as generation control and state estimation. Offered as ECSE 369 and ECSE 469. Prereq: ECSE 368.
ECSE 371	Applied Circuit Design	4 Units	This course will consist of lectures and lab projects designed to provide students with an opportunity to consolidate their theoretical knowledge of electronics and to acquaint them with the art and practice of circuit and product design.  The lectures will cover electrical and electronic circuits and many electronic and electrical devices and applications.  Examples include mixed-signal circuits, power electronics, magnetic and piezo components, gas discharge devices, sensors, motors and generators, and power systems.  In addition, there will be discussion of professional topics such as regulatory agencies, manufacturing, testing, reliability, and product cost.  Weekly labs will be true "design" opportunities representing real-world applications.  A specification or functional description will be provided, and the students will design the circuit, select all components, construct a breadboard, and test.  The objective will be functional, pragmatic, cost-effective designs. Offered as ECSE 371 and ECSE 471. Prereq: ECSE 344.
ECSE 373	Modern Robot Programming	3 Units	The goal of this course is to learn modern methods for building up robot capabilities using the Robot Operating System (ROS). Through a sequence of assignments, students learn how to write software to control both simulated and physical robots. Material includes: interfacing software to robot I/O; path and trajectory planning for robot arms; object identification and localization from 3-D sensing; manipulation planning; and development of graphical interfaces for supervisory robot control. Laboratory assignments are scheduled in small groups to explore implementations on specific robots.  Graduate students will also perform an independent project. Offered as CSDS 373, ECSE 373, CSDS 473 and ECSE 473. Prereq: ENGR 131 or ECSE 132.
ECSE 374	Advanced Control and Energy Systems	3 Units	This course introduces applied quantitative robust and nonlinear control engineering techniques to regulate automatically renewable energy systems in general and wind turbines in particular.  The course also studies the fundamentals for dynamic multidisciplinary modeling and analysis of large multi-megawatt wind turbines (mechanics, aerodynamics, electrical systems, control concepts, etc.).  The course combines lecture sessions and lab hours.  The 400-level includes an experimental lab competition, where the object is to design, implement, and experimentally validate a control strategy to regulate a real system in the laboratory (helicopter control competition or similar); it will also include additional project design reports. Offered as ECSE 374 and ECSE 474. Prereq: ECSE 304.
ECSE 375	Applied Control	3 Units	This course provides a practical treatment of the study of control engineering systems. It emphasizes best practices in industry so that students learn what aspects of plant and control system design are critical. The course develops theory and practice for digital computer control systems; PID controller design (modes, forms and tuning methods); Control structure design (feed-forward, cascade control, predictive control, disturbance observers, multi-loop configurations, multivariable control); Actuators, sensors and common loops; Dynamic performance evaluation; and some advanced control techniques (quantitative robust control, gain-scheduling and adaptive control) to achieve a good performance over a range of operating conditions.  Recommended preparation: ECSE 374 or 474. Offered as ECSE 375 and ECSE 475. Prereq: ECSE 304 or Requisites Not Met permission.
ECSE 376	Mobile Robotics	4 Units	Design of software systems for mobile robot control, including: motion control; sensory processing; localization and mapping; mobile-robot planning and navigation; and implementation of goal-directed behaviors.  The course has a heavy lab component involving a sequence of design challenges and competitions performed in teams. Offered as CSDS 376 and ECSE 376. Prereq: ECSE 373 or ECSE 473.
ECSE 377	Introduction to Connected Devices	3 Units	Introduction to Connected Devices (e.g., Internet of Things).  Undergraduates work in pairs to build a complete connected-device system, an embedded device with wireless networking, cloud and web, and mobile, and then develop hands-on experience with systems-level aspects of the connected-device system, including analytics, remote firmware update, load testing, and essential security.  Students learn about current architectures, languages, and technologies, such as Pub/Sub (MQTT), Python, Objective-C, Python Django, JavaScript, HTML/CSS, and Bluetooth Low Energy. Offered as CSDS 377 and ECSE 377.
ECSE 386	Quantum Computing, Information, and Devices	3 Units	An introduction to the math, physics, engineering, and computer science underlying the rapidly emerging fields of quantum computing, quantum information, and quantum devices. The course is taught by a group of faculty from physics, engineering, computer science, and math, and is geared towards students with diverse backgrounds and interests in these fields.  Students will select a concentration in one of these four areas, and the coursework, while still covering all topics, will be adjusted to focus on the selected area in the most detail.  Note that the listed prerequisites depend on choice of concentration.   Topics will include: 1	(Mathematics) Introduction to linear algebra, convex geometry, fundamental theory of quantum information. 2	(Physics) Introduction to the quantum mechanics of two-level systems (qubits). Survey of physics and materials for qubit technologies. 3	(Computer Science) Basic quantum gates and circuits, introduction to the theory of algorithms, survey of quantum algorithms. 4	(Engineering) Quantum architectures, mapping algorithms onto circuits.  The course consists of lectures, homework, and group projects.  Group projects will aim to synthesize the diverse backgrounds of the students and instructors to capture the interdisciplinary nature of the field. Students taking the course for graduate credit will complete an additional literature research project and presentation, in addition to enhanced problem sets. Offered as CSDS 386, CSDS 486, ECSE 386, ECSE 486, MATH 386, MATH 486, PHYS 386, and PHYS 486. Prereq: (CSDS 281 or ECSE 281) and (ENGR 131 or CSDS 132 or ECSE 132) and (MATH 223 or MATH 227) and (MATH 224 or MATH 228) and (PHYS 122 or PHYS 124).
ECSE 390	Advanced Game Development Project	3 Units	This game development project course will bring together an inter-professional group of students in the fields of engineering, computer science, and art to focus on the design and development of a complete, fully functioning computer game as an interdisciplinary team. The student teams are given complete liberty to design their own fully functional games from their original concept to a playable game published in an online marketplace. Student teams will experience the entire game development cycle as they execute their projects. Responsibilities include creating a game idea, writing a story, developing the artwork, designing characters, implementing music and sound effects, programming and testing the game, and publishing the final project. Students enrolled in 487 will develop a healthcare or education virtual environment or video game in collaboration with a mentor who has expertise in the chosen area. Offered as CSDS 390, ECSE 390, CSDS 487, and ECSE 487. Prereq: ECSE 233 and ECSE 290.
ECSE 394	Introduction to Information Theory	3 Units	This course is intended as an introduction to information and coding theory with emphasis on the mathematical aspects.  It is suitable for advanced undergraduate and graduate students in mathematics, applied mathematics, statistics, physics, computer science and electrical engineering.    Course content: Information measures-entropy, relative entropy, mutual information, and their properties.  Typical sets and sequences, asymptotic equipartition property, data compression.  Channel coding and capacity: channel coding theorem.  Differential entropy, Gaussian channel, Shannon-Nyquist theorem. Information theory inequalities (400 level). Additional topics, which may include compressed sensing and elements of quantum information theory. Recommended preparation: MATH 201 or MATH 307. Offered as MATH 394, CSDS 394, ECSE 394, MATH 494, CSDS 494 and ECSE 494. Prereq: MATH 223 and MATH 380 or requisites not met permission.
ECSE 396	Independent Projects	1 - 6 Units	Independent projects in Computer Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and Systems and Control Engineering. Prereq: Limited to juniors and seniors.
ECSE 397	Special Topics	1 - 6 Units	Special topics in Computer Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and Systems and Control Engineering. Prereq: Limited to juniors and seniors.
ECSE 398	Engineering Projects I	4 Units	Capstone course for electrical, computer, and systems and control engineering seniors. Material from previous and concurrent courses used to solve engineering design problems. Professional engineering topics such as project management, engineering design, communications, multidisciplinary teaming, and professional ethics. Requirements include periodic reporting of progress, plus a final oral presentation and written report. Scheduled formal project presentations during last week of classes. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: Senior Standing.  Prereq or Coreq: ENGR 398 and ENGL 398.
ECSE 399	Engineering Projects II	3 Units	Continuation of ECSE 398.  Material from previous and concurrent courses applied to engineering design and research.  Requirements include periodic reporting of progress, plus a final oral presentation and written report. Prereq: Senior Standing.
ECSE 400T	Graduate Teaching I	0 Unit	This course will provide the Ph.D. candidate with experience in teaching undergraduate or graduate students.  The experience is expected to involve direct student contact but will be based upon the specific departmental needs and teaching obligations.  This teaching experience will be conducted under the supervision of the faculty member who is responsible for the course, but the academic advisor will assess the educational plan to ensure that it provides an educational experience for the student.  Students in this course may be expected to perform one or more of the following teaching related activities: grading homeworks, quizzes, and exams, having office hours for students, tutoring students. Recommended preparation: Ph.D. student in ECSE department.
ECSE 401	Digital Signal Processing	3 Units	Characterization of discrete-time signals and systems. Fourier analysis: the Discrete-time Fourier Transform, the Discrete-time Fourier series, the Discrete Fourier Transform and the Fast Fourier Transform. Continuous-time signal sampling and signal reconstruction. Digital filter design: infinite impulse response filters, finite impulse response filters, filter realization and quantization effects. Random signals: discrete correlation sequences and power density spectra, response of linear systems. Recommended preparation: ECSE 313.
ECSE 404	Digital Control Systems	3 Units	Analysis and design techniques for computer based control systems. Sampling, hybrid continuous-time/discrete-time system modeling; sampled data and state space representations, controllability, observability and stability, transformation of analog controllers, design of deadbeat and state feedback controllers; pole placement controllers based on input/output models, introduction to model identification, optimal control and adaptive control. Recommended preparation: ECSE 304 or equivalent.
ECSE 407	Engineering Economics and Financial Analysis	3 Units	In this course, money and profit as measures of "goodness" in engineering design are studied.  Methods for economic analysis of capital investments are developed and the financial evaluation of machinery, manufacturing processes, buildings, R&D, personnel development, and other long-lived investments is emphasized.  Optimization methods and decision analysis techniques are examined to identify economically attractive alternatives.  Basic concepts of cost accounting are also covered.  Topics include: economics criteria for comparing projects: present worth, annual worth analysis; depreciation and taxation; retirement and replacement; effect of inflation and escalation on economic evaluations; case studies; use of optimization methods to evaluate many alternatives; decision analysis; accounting fundamentals: income and balance sheets; cost accounting. Offered as ECSE 407 and EPOM 407.
ECSE 408	Introduction to Linear Systems	3 Units	Analysis and design of linear feedback systems using state-space techniques. Review of matrix theory, linearization, transition maps and variations of constants formula, structural properties of state-space models, controllability and observability, realization theory, pole assignment and stabilization, linear quadratic regulator problems, observers, and the separation theorem. Recommended preparation: ECSE 304.
ECSE 410	Mobile Health (mHealth) Technology	3 Units	Advances in communications, computer, and medical technology have facilitated the practice of personalized health, which utilizes sensory computational communication systems to support improved and more personalized healthcare and healthy lifestyle choices. The current proliferation of broadband wireless services, along with more powerful and convenient handheld devices, is helping to introduce real-time monitoring and guidance for a wide array of patients. Indeed, a large research community and a nascent industry is beginning to connect medical care with technology developers, vendors of wireless and sensing hardware systems, network service providers, and enterprise data management communities. Students in the course and labs will explore cutting-edge technologies in 1) information technologies and 2) healthcare/medical applications, through lectures, lab assignments, exams, presentations, and final projects. The overall course objectives are to introduce electrical engineering, computer engineering, and computer science students the fundamentals of wearable sensors, mobile health informatics, big data analysis, telehealthcare security & privacy, and human computer interaction considerations. Prereq: Graduate student standing.
ECSE 411	Applied Engineering Statistics	3 Units	In this course a combination of lectures, demonstrations, case studies, and individual and group computer problems provides an intensive introduction to fundamental concepts, applications and the practice of contemporary engineering statistics.  Each topic is introduced through realistic sample problems to be solved first by using standard spreadsheet programs and then using more sophisticated software packages.  Primary attention is given to teaching the fundamental concepts underlying standard analysis methods. Offered as EPOM 405 and ECSE 411.
ECSE 413	Nonlinear Systems I	3 Units	This course will provide an introduction to techniques used for the analysis of nonlinear dynamic systems.  Topics will include existence and uniqueness of solutions, phase plane analysis of two dimensional systems including Poincare-Bendixson, describing functions for single-input single-output systems, averaging methods, bifurcation theory, stability, and an introduction to the study of complicated dynamics and chaos. Recommended preparation: Concurrent enrollment in ECSE 408.
ECSE 414	Wireless Communications	3 Units	This course introduces the fundamentals of wireless communications including backgrounds, important concepts, and cutting-edge technologies. In particular, the course focuses on interesting and important topics in wireless communications, such as (but not limited to): Overview of wireless communication networks and protocols, the cellular concept, system design fundamentals, brief introduction to wireless physical layer fundamentals, multiple access control protocols for wireless systems, wireless networking (routing/rerouting, wireless TCP/IP), mobility management, call admission control and resource allocation, revolution/evolution towards future generation wireless networks, overview of wireless mesh networks, mobile ad hoc networks and wireless sensor networks, and wireless security (optional). Offered as ECSE 316 and ECSE 414. Prereq: Graduate student or ECSE 351 with a C or better.
ECSE 415	Integrated Circuit Technology I	3 Units	Review of semiconductor technology. Device fabrication processing, material evaluation, oxide passivation, pattern transfer technique, diffusion, ion implantation, metallization, probing, packaging, and testing. Design and fabrication of passive and active semi-conductor devices. Recommended preparation: ECSE 322.
ECSE 416	Convex Optimization for Engineering	3 Units	This course will focus on the development of a working knowledge and skills to recognize, formulate, and solve convex optimization problems that are so prevalent in engineering. Applications in control systems; parameter and state estimation; signal processing; communications and networks; circuit design; data modeling and analysis; data mining including clustering and classification; and combinatorial and global optimization will be highlighted. New reliable and efficient methods, particular those based on interior-point methods and other special methods to solve convex optimization problems will be emphasized. Implementation issues will also be underscored. Recommended preparation: MATH 201 or equivalent.
ECSE 417	Computer Design - FPGAs	3 Units	The aim is to expose the student to methodologies for systematic design of digital systems with emphasis on programmable logic implementations and prototyping. The course requires a number of hands-on experiments and an overall lab project.  The lab involves a number of class lectures to familiarize the students with the modern design techniques based on VHDL/Verilog Hardware Design Languages, CAD tools, and FPGAs.  Offered as ECSE 317 and ECSE 417.
ECSE 418	System Identification and Adaptive Control	3 Units	Parameter identification methods for linear discrete time systems: maximum likelihood and least squares estimation techniques. Adaptive control for linear discrete time systems including self-tuning regulators and model reference adaptive control. Consideration of both theoretical and practical issues relating to the use of identification and adaptive control.
ECSE 419	Computer System Architecture	3 Units	Interaction between computer systems hardware and software. Pipeline techniques - instruction pipelines - arithmetic pipelines. Instruction level parallelism. Cache mechanism. I/O structures. Examples taken from existing computer systems.
ECSE 422	Solid State Electronics II	3 Units	Advanced physics of semiconductor devices. Review of current transport and semiconductor electronics. Surface and interface properties. P-N junction. Bipolar junction transistors, field effect transistors, solar cells and photonic devices.
ECSE 426	MOS Integrated Circuit Design	3 Units	Design of digital and analog MOS integrated circuits. IC fabrication and device models. Logic, memory, and clock generation. Amplifiers, comparators, references, and switched-capacitor circuits. Characterization of circuit performance with/without parasitics using hand analysis and SPICE circuit simulation. Recommended preparation: ECSE 344 and ECSE 321.
ECSE 427	Optoelectronic and Photonic Devices	3 Units	In this course, we will study the optical transitions, absorptions, and gains in semiconductors. We will discuss the optical processes in semiconductor bulk as well as low dimensional structures such as quantum well and quantum dot. The fundamentals, technologies and applications of important optoelectronic devices (e.g., light-emitting diodes, semiconductor lasers, solar cells and photo-detectors) will be introduced. We will learn the current state-of-the-art of these devices.  Recommended preparation: ECSE 321.
ECSE 434	Microsystems Technology	3 Units	This course provides an overarching coverage of microsystems technology, which is rooted in micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS).  It covers the convergence of sensors and actuators, with wireless communications, computing and (social) networks.  Microsystems incorporate sensors and actuators to interface computing with its physical environment-enabling perception and control.  Microsystems are key enablers of smartphones, wearables, drones, robots, cars, aircrafts, weapons, etc.  Recommended preparation: ECSE 322.
ECSE 438	High Performance Data and Computing	3 Units	High performance data and computing (HPDC) leverages parallel processing in order to maximize speed and throughput. This hands-on course will cover theoretical and practical aspects of HPDC. Theoretical concepts covered include computer architecture, parallel programming, and performance optimization. Practical applications will be discussed from various information and scientific fields. Practical considerations will include HPDC job management and Unix scripting. Weekly assessments and a course project will be required. Offered as CSDS 438 and ECSE 438. Prereq: ECSE 233 or graduate standing.
ECSE 443	Flexible Electronics	3 Units	Learning about flexible and stretchable electronics from materials to applications.  Covering organic and inorganic semiconductors, vacuum and solution-based metal-oxide semiconductors, nanomembranes and nanocrystals, conductors and insulators, flexible and ultra-high-resolution displays, lightemitting transistors, organic and inorganic photovoltaics, large-area imagers and sensors, non-volatile memories and radio-frequency identification tags.  Discussing applications of flexible, stretchable and large-area electronics as part of the foregoing topics.  Recommended preparation: ECSE 322.
ECSE 450	Operations and Systems Design	3 Units	Introduction to design, modeling, and optimization of operations and scheduling systems with applications to computer science and engineering problems. Topics include, forecasting and times series, strategic, tactical, and operational planning, life cycle analysis, learning curves, resources allocation, materials requirement and capacity planning, sequencing, scheduling, inventory control, project management and planning. Tools for analysis include: multi-objective optimization, queuing models, simulation, and artificial intelligence.
ECSE 452	Random Signals	3 Units	Fundamental concepts in probability. Probability distribution and density functions. Random variables, functions of random variables, mean, variance, higher moments, Gaussian random variables, random processes, stationary random processes, and ergodicity. Correlation functions and power spectral density. Orthogonal series representation of colored noise. Representation of bandpass noise and application to communication systems. Application to signals and noise in linear systems. Introduction to estimation, sampling, and prediction. Discussion of Poisson, Gaussian, and Markov processes.
ECSE 460	Manufacturing and Automated Systems	3 Units	Formulation, modeling, planning, and control of manufacturing and automated systems with applications to computer science and engineering problems. Topics include, design of products and processes, location/spatial problems, transportation and assignment, product and process layout, group technology and clustering, cellular and network flow layouts, computer control systems, reliability and maintenance, and statistical quality control. Tools and analysis include: multi-objective optimization, artificial intelligence, and heuristics for combinatorial problems. Offered as ECSE 360 and ECSE 460.
ECSE 465	Computer Vision	3 Units	The goal of computer vision is to create visual systems that recognize objects and recover structures in complex 3D scenes.  This course emphasizes both the science behind our understanding of the fundamental problems in vision and the engineering that develops mathematical models and inference algorithms to solve these problems.  Specific topics include feature detection, matching, and classification; visual representations and dimensionality reduction; motion detection and optical flow; image segmentation; depth perception, multi-view geometry, and 3D reconstruction; shape and surface perception; visual scene analysis and object recognition. Offered as CSDS 465 and ECSE 465.
ECSE 466	Computer Graphics	3 Units	Theory and practice of computer graphics: object and environment representation including coordinate transformations image extraction including perspective, hidden surface, and shading algorithms; and interaction.  Covers a wide range of graphic display devices and systems with emphasis in interactive shaded graphics. Offered as CSDS 366, ECSE 366, CSDS 466 and ECSE 466. Prereq: Graduate standing or Requisites Not Met permission.
ECSE 467	Commercialization and Intellectual Property Management	3 Units	This interdisciplinary course covers a variety of topics, including principles of intellectual property and intellectual property management, business strategies and modeling relevant to the creation of start-up companies and exploitation of IP rights as they relate to biomedical-related inventions.  The goal of this course is to address issues relating to the commercialization of biomedical-related inventions by exposing law students, MBA students, and Ph.D. candidates (in genetics and proteomics) to the challenges and opportunities encountered when attempting to develop biomedical intellectual property from the point of early discovery to the clinic and market.  Specifically, this course seeks to provide students with the ability to value a given technological advance or invention holistically, focusing on issues that extend beyond scientific efficacy and include patient and practitioner value propositions, legal and intellectual property protection, business modeling, potential market impacts, market competition, and ethical, social, and healthcare practitioner acceptance.  During this course, law students, MBA students, and Ph.D. candidates in genomics and proteomics will work in teams of five (two laws students, two MBA students and one Ph.D. candidate), focusing on issues of commercialization and IP management of biomedical-related inventions.  The instructors will be drawn from the law school, business school, and technology-transfer office.  Please visit the following website for more information: fusioninnovate.com. Offered as EBME 467, ECSE 467, GENE 367, GENE 467, LAWS 5341, MGMT 467, and RGME 467.
ECSE 468	Power System Analysis I	3 Units	This course introduces the steady-state modeling and analysis of electric power systems. The course discusses the modeling of essential power system network components such as transformers and transmission lines. The course also discusses important steady-state analysis of three-phase power system network, such as the power flow and economic operation studies. Through the use of PowerWorld Simulator education software, further understanding and knowledge can be gained on the operational characteristics of AC power systems. Special topics concerning new grid technologies will be discussed towards the semester end. The prerequisite requirements of the course include the concepts and computational techniques of Alternative Current (AC) circuit and electromagnetic field. Offered as ECSE 368 and ECSE 468. Prereq: ECSE 245.
ECSE 469	Power System Analysis II	3 Units	This course extends upon the steady state analysis of power systems to cover study topics that are essential for power system planning and operation. Special system operating conditions are considered, such as unbalanced network operation and component faults. Among the most important analytical methods developed, are symmetrical components and sequence networks. Other study topics discussed include the electric machine modeling and power system transient stability. The latter half of the course presents computational methods and control algorithms that are essential for power system operation, such as generation control and state estimation. Offered as ECSE 369 and ECSE 469. Prereq: ECSE 468.
ECSE 471	Applied Circuit Design	4 Units	This course will consist of lectures and lab projects designed to provide students with an opportunity to consolidate their theoretical knowledge of electronics and to acquaint them with the art and practice of circuit and product design.  The lectures will cover electrical and electronic circuits and many electronic and electrical devices and applications.  Examples include mixed-signal circuits, power electronics, magnetic and piezo components, gas discharge devices, sensors, motors and generators, and power systems.  In addition, there will be discussion of professional topics such as regulatory agencies, manufacturing, testing, reliability, and product cost.  Weekly labs will be true "design" opportunities representing real-world applications.  A specification or functional description will be provided, and the students will design the circuit, select all components, construct a breadboard, and test.  The objective will be functional, pragmatic, cost-effective designs. Offered as ECSE 371 and ECSE 471.
ECSE 473	Modern Robot Programming	3 Units	The goal of this course is to learn modern methods for building up robot capabilities using the Robot Operating System (ROS). Through a sequence of assignments, students learn how to write software to control both simulated and physical robots. Material includes: interfacing software to robot I/O; path and trajectory planning for robot arms; object identification and localization from 3-D sensing; manipulation planning; and development of graphical interfaces for supervisory robot control. Laboratory assignments are scheduled in small groups to explore implementations on specific robots.  Graduate students will also perform an independent project. Offered as CSDS 373, ECSE 373, CSDS 473 and ECSE 473. Prereq: ENGR 131 or ECSE 132.
ECSE 474	Advanced Control and Energy Systems	3 Units	This course introduces applied quantitative robust and nonlinear control engineering techniques to regulate automatically renewable energy systems in general and wind turbines in particular.  The course also studies the fundamentals for dynamic multidisciplinary modeling and analysis of large multi-megawatt wind turbines (mechanics, aerodynamics, electrical systems, control concepts, etc.).  The course combines lecture sessions and lab hours.  The 400-level includes an experimental lab competition, where the object is to design, implement, and experimentally validate a control strategy to regulate a real system in the laboratory (helicopter control competition or similar); it will also include additional project design reports. Offered as ECSE 374 and ECSE 474. Prereq: ECSE 304.
ECSE 475	Applied Control	3 Units	This course provides a practical treatment of the study of control engineering systems. It emphasizes best practices in industry so that students learn what aspects of plant and control system design are critical. The course develops theory and practice for digital computer control systems; PID controller design (modes, forms and tuning methods); Control structure design (feed-forward, cascade control, predictive control, disturbance observers, multi-loop configurations, multivariable control); Actuators, sensors and common loops; Dynamic performance evaluation; and some advanced control techniques (quantitative robust control, gain-scheduling and adaptive control) to achieve a good performance over a range of operating conditions.  Recommended preparation: ECSE 374 or 474. Offered as ECSE 375 and ECSE 475. Prereq: ECSE 304 or Requisites Not Met permission.
ECSE 476	Mobile Robotics	3 Units	Design of software systems for mobile robot control, including: motion control; sensory processing; localization and mapping; mobile-robot planning and navigation; and implementation of goal-directed behaviors.  The course has a heavy lab component involving a sequence of design challenges and competitions performed in teams. Offered as CSDS 476 and ECSE 476. Prereq: ECSE 373 or ECSE 473.
ECSE 478	Computational Neuroscience	3 Units	Computer simulations and mathematical analysis of neurons and neural circuits, and the computational properties of nervous systems.  Students are taught a range of models for neurons and neural circuits, and are asked to implement and explore the computational and dynamic properties of these models.  The course introduces students to dynamical systems theory for the analysis of neurons and neural learning, models of brain systems, and their relationship to artificial and neural networks.  Term project required.  Students enrolled in MATH 478 will make arrangements with the instructor to attend additional lectures and complete additional assignments addressing mathematical topics related to the course.   Recommended preparation: MATH 223 and MATH 224 or BIOL 300 and BIOL 306. Offered as BIOL 378, COGS 378, MATH 378, BIOL 478, CSDS 478, EBME 478, ECSE 478, MATH 478 and NEUR 478.
ECSE 480A	Introduction to Wireless Health	3 Units	Study of convergence of wireless communications, microsystems, information technology, persuasive psychology, and health care.  Discussion of health care delivery system, medical decision-making, persuasive psychology, and wireless health value chain and business models.  Understanding of health information technology, processing of monitoring data, wireless communication, biomedical sensing techniques, and health monitoring technical approaches and solutions. Offered as ECSE 480A and EBME 480A.
ECSE 480B	The Human Body	3 Units	Study of structural organization of the body.  Introduction to anatomy, physiology, and pathology, covering the various systems of the body.  Comparison of elegant and efficient operation of the body and the related consequences of when things go wrong, presented in the context of each system of the body.  Introduction to medical diagnosis and terminology in the course of covering the foregoing. Offered as ECSE 480B and EBME 480B.
ECSE 480C	Biomedical Sensing Instrumentation	3 Units	Study of principles, applications, and design of biomedical instruments with special emphasis on transducers. Understanding of basic sensors, amplifiers, and signal processing. Discussion of the origin of biopotential, and biopotential electrodes and amplifiers (including biotelemetry). Understanding of chemical sensors and clinical laboratory instrumentation, including microfluidics. Offered as ECSE 480C and EBME 480C. Prereq: ECSE 480A and ECSE 480B.
ECSE 480D	The Health Care Delivery Ecosystem	3 Units	Health care delivery across the continuum of care in the United States, including health policy and reform, financing of care, comparative health systems, population health, public health, access to care, care models, cost and value, comparative effectiveness, governance, management, accountability, workforce, and the future.  Discussions of opportunities and challenges for wireless health, integrated into the foregoing topics.  Perspective on health care delivery in other countries. Offered as ECSE 480D and EBME 480D.
ECSE 480E	Wireless Communications and Networking	3 Units	Essentials of wireless communications and networking, including teletraffic engineering, radio propagation, digital and cellular communications, wireless wide-area network architecture, speech and channel coding, modulation schemes, antennas, security, networking and transport layers, and 4G systems.  Hands-on learning of the anatomy of a cell phone, and a paired wireless health device and its gateway. Offered as ECSE 480E and EBME 480E.
ECSE 480F	Physicians, Hospitals and Clinics	3 Units	Rotation through one or more health care provider facilities for a first-hand understanding of care delivery practice, coordination, and management issues.  First-hand exposure to clinical personnel, patients, medical devices and instruments, and organizational workflow.  Familiarity with provider protocols, physician referral practices, electronic records, clinical decision support systems, acute and chronic care, and inpatient and ambulatory care. Offered as ECSE 480F and EBME 480F.
ECSE 480Q	Regulatory Policy and Regulations	3 Units	Introduction of wireless health technologies: spectrum, licensed versus unlicensed; personal area networks; body area networks; ultra-wideband low energy level short-range radios; wireless local area networks; wide area networks. The Federal system: separation of powers; the executive branch and its departments; the House of Representatives and its committees; the Senate and its committees; the FCC; policy versus regulatory versus legislative. What is a medical device: FDA; classification system; radiation-emitting products; software; RF in medical devices; converged medical devices; international aspects. Regulation of health information technology and wireless health: American Recovery and Reinvestment Act; Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act; FCC/FDA MoU; CMS and Reimbursement; privacy and security. Offered as ECSE 480Q and EBME 480Q.
ECSE 480R	User Experience Engineering	3 Units	Social, cognitive, behavioral, and contextual elements in the design of healthcare technology and systems.  User-centered design paradigm from a broad perspective, exploring dimensions of product user experience and learning to assess and modify the design of healthcare technology. Practical utilization of user centered design method and assessment techniques for approaching a design problem. Offered as ECSE 480R and EBME 480R.
ECSE 480S	Wireless Health Product Development	3 Units	Integrating application requirements, market data, concept formulation, design innovation, and manufacturing resources for creating differentiated wireless health products that delight the user.  Learning user-centric product development best practices, safety, security and privacy considerations, and risk management planning.  Understanding the regulatory process.  Identifying and managing product development tradeoffs. Offered as ECSE 480S and EBME 480S. Prereq: ECSE 480R.
ECSE 484	Computational Intelligence I: Basic Principles	3 Units	This course is concerned with learning the fundamentals of a number of computational methodologies which are used in adaptive parallel distributed information processing. Such methodologies include neural net computing, evolutionary programming, genetic algorithms, fuzzy set theory, and "artificial life." These computational paradigms complement and supplement the traditional practices of pattern recognition and artificial intelligence. Functionalities covered include self-organization, learning a model or supervised learning, optimization, and memorization.
ECSE 485	VLSI Systems	3 Units	Basic MOSFET models, inverters, steering logic, the silicon gate, nMOS process, design rules, basic design structures (e.g., NAND and NOR gates, PLA, ROM, RAM), design methodology and tools (spice, N.mpc, Caesar, mkpla), VLSI technology and system architecture. Requires project and student presentation, laboratory.
ECSE 486	Quantum Computing, Information, and Devices	3 Units	An introduction to the math, physics, engineering, and computer science underlying the rapidly emerging fields of quantum computing, quantum information, and quantum devices. The course is taught by a group of faculty from physics, engineering, computer science, and math, and is geared towards students with diverse backgrounds and interests in these fields.  Students will select a concentration in one of these four areas, and the coursework, while still covering all topics, will be adjusted to focus on the selected area in the most detail.  Note that the listed prerequisites depend on choice of concentration.   Topics will include: 1	(Mathematics) Introduction to linear algebra, convex geometry, fundamental theory of quantum information. 2	(Physics) Introduction to the quantum mechanics of two-level systems (qubits). Survey of physics and materials for qubit technologies. 3	(Computer Science) Basic quantum gates and circuits, introduction to the theory of algorithms, survey of quantum algorithms. 4	(Engineering) Quantum architectures, mapping algorithms onto circuits.  The course consists of lectures, homework, and group projects.  Group projects will aim to synthesize the diverse backgrounds of the students and instructors to capture the interdisciplinary nature of the field. Students taking the course for graduate credit will complete an additional literature research project and presentation, in addition to enhanced problem sets. Offered as CSDS 386, CSDS 486, ECSE 386, ECSE 486, MATH 386, MATH 486, PHYS 386, and PHYS 486. Prereq: (CSDS 281 or ECSE 281) and (ENGR 131 or CSDS 132 or ECSE 132) and (MATH 223 or MATH 227) and (MATH 224 or MATH 228) and (PHYS 122 or PHYS 124).
ECSE 487	Advanced Game Development Project	3 Units	This game development project course will bring together an inter-professional group of students in the fields of engineering, computer science, and art to focus on the design and development of a complete, fully functioning computer game as an interdisciplinary team. The student teams are given complete liberty to design their own fully functional games from their original concept to a playable game published in an online marketplace. Student teams will experience the entire game development cycle as they execute their projects. Responsibilities include creating a game idea, writing a story, developing the artwork, designing characters, implementing music and sound effects, programming and testing the game, and publishing the final project. Students enrolled in 487 will develop a healthcare or education virtual environment or video game in collaboration with a mentor who has expertise in the chosen area. Offered as CSDS 390, ECSE 390, CSDS 487, and ECSE 487. Prereq: Graduate student standing.
ECSE 488	Embedded Systems Design	3 Units	Objective: to introduce and expose the student to methodologies for systematic design of embedded system. The topics include, but are not limited to, system specification, architecture modeling, component partitioning, estimation metrics, hardware software codesign, diagnostics.
ECSE 489	Robotics I	3 Units	Orientation and configuration coordinate transformations, forward and inverse kinematics and Newton-Euler and Lagrange-Euler dynamic analysis. Planning of manipulator trajectories. Force, position, and hybrid control of robot manipulators. Analytical techniques applied to select industrial robots. Recommended preparation: EMAE 181. Offered as CSDS 489, ECSE 489 and EMAE 489.
ECSE 490	Digital Image Processing	3 Units	Digital images are introduced as two-dimensional sampled arrays of data.  The course begins with one-to-one operations such as image addition and subtraction and image descriptors such as the histogram.  Basic filters such as the gradient and Laplacian in the spatial domain are used to enhance images.  The 2-D Fourier transform is introduced and frequency domain operations such as high and low-pass filtering are developed.  It is shown how filtering techniques can be used to remove noise and other image degradation.  The different methods of representing color images are described and fundamental concepts of color image transformations and color image processing are developed.  One or more advanced topics such as wavelets, image compression, and pattern recognition will be covered as time permits.  Programming assignments using software such as MATLAB will illustrate the application and implementation of digital image processing. Offered as CSDS 490 and ECSE 490.
ECSE 494	Introduction to Information Theory	3 Units	This course is intended as an introduction to information and coding theory with emphasis on the mathematical aspects.  It is suitable for advanced undergraduate and graduate students in mathematics, applied mathematics, statistics, physics, computer science and electrical engineering.    Course content: Information measures-entropy, relative entropy, mutual information, and their properties.  Typical sets and sequences, asymptotic equipartition property, data compression.  Channel coding and capacity: channel coding theorem.  Differential entropy, Gaussian channel, Shannon-Nyquist theorem. Information theory inequalities (400 level). Additional topics, which may include compressed sensing and elements of quantum information theory. Recommended preparation: MATH 201 or MATH 307. Offered as MATH 394, CSDS 394, ECSE 394, MATH 494, CSDS 494 and ECSE 494.
ECSE 499	Algorithmic Robotics	3 Units	This course introduces basic algorithmic techniques in robotic perception and planning.  Course is divided into two parts.  The first part introduces probabilistic modeling of robotic motion and sensing, Gaussian and nonparametric filters, and algorithms for mobile robot localization.  The second part introduces fundamental deterministic and randomized algorithms for motion planning. Offered as CSDS 499 and ECSE 499. Prereq: Graduate Standing or Requisites Not Met permission.
ECSE 500	ECSE Colloquium	0 Unit	Seminars on current topics in Electrical, Computer and Systems Engineering.
ECSE 500T	Graduate Teaching II	0 Unit	This course will provide the Ph.D. candidate with experience in teaching undergraduate or graduate students.  The experience is expected to involve direct student contact but will be based upon the specific departmental needs and teaching obligations.  This teaching experience will be conducted under the supervision of the faculty member who is responsible for the course, but the academic advisor will assess the educational plan to ensure that it provides an educational experience for the student.  Students in this course may be expected to perform one or more of the following teaching related activities: grading homeworks, quizzes, and exams, having office hours for students, running recitation sessions, providing laboratory assistance. Recommended preparation: Ph.D. student in ECSE department.
ECSE 526	Integrated Mixed-Signal Systems	3 Units	Mixed-signal (analog/digital) integrated circuit design. D-to-A and A-to-D conversion, applications in mixed-signal VLSI, low-noise and low-power techniques, and communication sub-circuits. System simulation at the transistor and behavioral levels using SPICE. Class will design a mixed-signal CMOS IC for fabrication by MOSIS. Recommended preparation: ECSE 426.
ECSE 527	Advanced Sensors: Theory and Techniques	3 Units	Sensor technology with a primary focus on semiconductor-based devices. Physical principles of energy conversion devices (sensors) with a review of relevant fundamentals: elasticity theory, fluid mechanics, silicon fabrication and micromachining technology, semiconductor device physics. Classification and terminology of sensors, defining and measuring sensor characteristics and performance, effect of the environment on sensors, predicting and controlling sensor error. Mechanical, acoustic, magnetic, thermal, radiation, chemical and biological sensors will be examined. Sensor packaging and sensor interface circuitry.
ECSE 589	Robotics II	3 Units	Survey of research issues in robotics. Force control, visual servoing, robot autonomy, on-line planning, high-speed control, man/machine interfaces, robot learning, sensory processing for real-time control. Primarily a project-based lab course in which students design real-time software executing on multi-processors to control an industrial robot. Recommended preparation: CSDS/ECSE 489. Offered as CSDS 589 and ECSE 589.
ECSE 600	Special Topics	1 - 18 Units	
ECSE 600T	Graduate Teaching III	0 Unit	This course will provide Ph.D. candidate with experience in teaching undergraduate or graduate students.  The experience is expected to involve direct student contact but will be based upon the specific departmental needs and teaching obligations.  This teaching experience will be conducted under the supervision of the faculty member who is responsible for the course, but the academic advisor will assess the educational plan to ensure that it provides an educational experience for the student.  Students in this course may be expected to perform one or more of the following teaching related activities running recitation sessions, providing laboratory assistance, developing teaching or lecture materials presenting lectures. Recommended preparation: Ph.D. student in ECSE department.
ECSE 601	Independent Study	1 - 18 Units	
ECSE 620	Special Topics	1 - 18 Units	
ECSE 621	Special Projects	1 - 18 Units	
ECSE 651	Thesis M.S.	1 - 18 Units	Credit as arranged.
ECSE 695	Project M.S.	1 - 9 Units	Research course taken by Plan B M.S. students. Prereq: Enrolled in an Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering Plan B MS Program.
ECSE 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	Credit as arranged.
DNDO 529	Endodontology	3 Units	Scientific rationale for endodontic practice. Endodontic anatomy, physiology, pathology, and microbiology. All treatments and techniques studied and substantiated by current and classical research.
DNDO 539	Endodontic Literature Review	3 Units	Provides scientific basis for present and future treatment. Instructs students in critically evaluating literature. Provides format for lifelong self-education. Specific journal assignments summarized, evaluated, and presented for group discussion weekly.
DNDO 551	Clinical Endodontic Specialty	3 Units	Students present case histories as they encounter them in clinic. Cases discussed in detail and critically evaluated by colleagues and graduate endodontic faculty. Past endodontic literature discussed in detail as each student presents a topic assigned by faculty. Problems in clinic discussed. Several guest endodontists present various techniques and perform them.
DNDO 651	Sedation in Endodontic Practice	1 - 3 Units	5 modules designed to provide in-depth knowledge of minimal and moderate sedation to graduate endodontic students with the goal of becoming proficient in providing safe and effective minimal or moderate sedation to patients undergoing endodontic therapies. Recommended preparation: Current American Heart Association certification in BLS or Red Cross certification in Professional rescuer CPR.
ENGR 130	Foundations of Engineering and Programming	3 Units	Students will learn the fundamentals of engineering analysis and computer programming using a hands-on, project-based approach. During each module, students will apply engineering skills, such as data analysis or prototyping, in addition to programming, to complete a given task. MATLAB will be the primary coding language. Projects incorporate skills from various engineering disciplines. In addition, students will learn about the engineering profession and practice presentation skills.
ENGR 131	Elementary Computer Programming	3 Units	Students will learn the fundamentals of computer programming and algorithmic problem solving.  Concepts are illustrated using a wide range of examples from engineering, science, and other disciplines.  Students learn how to create, debug, and test computer programs, and how to develop algorithmic solution to problems and write programs that implement those solutions.  Matlab is the primary programming language used in this course, but other languages may be introduced or used throughout. Counts for CAS Quantitative Reasoning Requirement.
ENGR 145	Chemistry of Materials	4 Units	Application of fundamental chemistry principles to materials. Emphasis is on bonding and how this relates to the structure and properties in metals, ceramics, polymers and electronic materials. Application of chemistry principles to develop an understanding of how to synthesize materials. Prereq: CHEM 111 or equivalent.
ENGR 200	Statics and Strength of Materials	3 Units	An introduction to the analysis, behavior and design of mechanical/structural systems.  Course topics include: concepts of equilibrium; geometric properties and distributed forces; stress, strain and mechanical properties of materials; and, linear elastic behavior of elements. Prereq: PHYS 121.
ENGR 200S	Statics and Strength of Materials - Supplemental	0 - 1 Units	This course allows students who are seeking transfer credit for ENGR 200 for a Statics course taken an another educational institution to obtain missing content in the area of Strength of Materials and to show passing proficiency in this content.
ENGR 200T	Statics and Strength of Materials (in Tianjin, China)	3 Units	An introduction to the analysis, behavior and design of mechanical/structural systems.  Course topics include: concepts of equilibrium; geometric properties and distributed forces; stress, strain and mechanical properties of materials; and, linear elastic behavior of elements. Prereq: PHYS 121.
ENGR 210	Introduction to Circuits and Instrumentation	4 Units	Modeling and circuit analysis of analog and digital circuits.  Fundamental concepts in circuit analysis: voltage and current sources, Kirchhoff's Laws, Thevenin, and Norton equivalent circuits, inductors capacitors, and transformers.  Modeling sensors and amplifiers and measuring DC device characteristics.  Characterization and measurement of time dependent waveforms.  Transient behavior of circuits.  Frequency dependent behavior of devices and amplifiers, frequency measurements.  AC power and power measurements.  Electronic devices as switches. Prereq: MATH 122. Prereq or Coreq: PHYS 122.
ENGR 210S	Introduction to Circuits and Instrumentation - Supplemental	1 - 3 Units	This course allows students who are seeking transfer credit for ENGR 210 for a Circuits course taken at another educational institution to obtain missing Laboratory content and to show passing proficiency in this content.
ENGR 225	Thermodynamics, Fluid Dynamics, Heat and Mass Transfer	4 Units	Elementary thermodynamic concepts: first and second laws, and equilibrium.  Basic fluid dynamics, heat transfer, and mass transfer: microscopic and macroscopic perspectives. Prereq: PHYS 121 or PHYS 123.  Prereq or Coreq: MATH 223 or MATH 227.
ENGR 225B	Thermodynamics, Fluid Mechanics, Heat and Mass Transfer (abroad)	4 Units	Elementary thermodynamic concepts: first and second laws, and equilibrium.  Basic fluid dynamics, heat transfer, and mass transfer: microscopic and macroscopic perspectives.  The course is taught as a faculty-led study abroad course, and engineering applications are discussed in the context of regional issues specific to the host country. Prereq: CHEM 111, ENGR 145, and PHYS 121. Coreq: MATH 223.
ENGR 225S	Thermodynamics, Fluid Dynamics, Heat and Mass Transfer - Supplemental	0 - 2 Units	This course allows students who are seeking transfer credit for ENGR 225 for a Thermodynamics course taken an another educational institution to obtain possible missing content in the area of fluid dynamics, heat, or mass transfer and to show passing proficiency in this content.
ENGR 350U	Global Health Design in Uganda	1 - 3 Units	The CWRU Anthropology-Engineering Collaborative (AEC) offers this unique course applying social science and engineering skills and expertise to address global health issues in Uganda. The AEC is part of a longstanding collaboration between CWRU and Makerere University in Kampala, Uganda. Students collaborate with students at Makerere University in Kampala, Uganda and the CWRU student group, Global Health Design Collaborative (GHDC), to design and implement solutions to specific health issues in Luwero, Uganda.   Students meet weekly during the semester to learn about global health technology design and anthropology. Students work with GHDC and program faculty on specific projects; activities may include conducting needs assessment, prototype development, design validation and verification, and preparation of a project report. Current projects focus on designing a pediatric pulse oximeter; identifying means to preserve the cold chain for vaccine outreach and improving medical waste disposal.   In Uganda, students and their Makerere University counterparts travel together to Luwero district where they visit health centers to collaborate with local staff to review current design prototypes and issues. Activities include: talking to health center staff at different levels of the health care system, observing a community health outreach, and meeting with diverse stakeholders in Luwero and Kampala. Students gain hands-on experience in engineering design, social science methods, and working in transnational, interdisciplinary teams and contribute directly to ongoing efforts to address global health issues in Uganda. Students are encouraged to contribute to the projects through ongoing work with GHDC.  The course may be taken as either ENGR 350U or ANTH 300. The course fee covers travel and on-the-ground expenses. The class is open to all majors but enrollment is by application and instructors' consent. Students who enroll in 3 credits may count the class for the CSE humanities/social science requirement and/or the CAS Global and Cultural Diversity requirement.  Offered as ENGR 350U and ANTH 300.
ENGR 390	Basic Visual Communication	2 Units	This course is focused on fundamental visual communication techniques for product development. Students will learn to explore and present their ideas through sketching, rendering, orthographic drawing and physical modeling. Drawing and modeling skills in this course will be practiced manually rather than digitally (i.e., pen and paper, hand-built models).   Studio time will include group demos, in-class assignments and exercises, and one-on-one instruction. Coursework is tailored for Case students, however attempts will be made to align this course with the standard Industrial Design Communication Skills Course at The Cleveland Institute of Art (CIA). This will allow opportunities for networking and collaboration with CIA students. Prereq: Must be a Sophomore or above or in a declared Engineering major.
ENGR 395	Community-engaged, Interdisciplinary Team-based Design Projects	1 - 3 Units	Interdisciplinary, team-based design projects under faculty guidance and with professional mentorship as appropriate. Each enrolled student will be part of a project team. Class will meet weekly for training, design reviews and progress updates. Teams will additionally meet outside of class time. Engagement with community partner (customer) is expected. Projects may be long term, possibly preceding and extending beyond the engagement time of individual students. Team members will have individual roles and responsibilities. Course may be taken for 1-3 credits, and level of responsibility will be proportional.  Course deliverables will include rigorous maintenance of project documentation, including a transition report, and oral presentations.  Intended for second-year students and above.  Students in all disciplines are welcome. Projects may involve international partnerships, but travel is not mandatory.
ENGR 397	Interdisciplinary Solutions to Global Health Issues	3 Units	This unique course brings together the expertise of engineers and social scientists to address global health issues through a combination of classroom-based learning and experiential learning through team-based design projects and field-based community assessments.  Students will experience the process of engineering design by participating in teams organized around solutions to real-world health problems in the developing world.  Methods from social sciences will be practiced and brought to bear in the process, including assessment of global health needs, and evaluation of success of interventions. Students will study and discuss current key issues in global health, and ethics surrounding health care, disparity, methods of intervention, and develop skills in how to define and frame problems and communicate effectively across disciplines.   The course is organized around ongoing projects that seek to design technical solutions to global health issues, with a focus on Uganda. The teams will also work and learn with students and faculty of Biomedical Engineering and Social Sciences at Makerere University of Kampala (MUK), Uganda.  Examples of interactions with MUK will include discussion of common readings, peer-review, and joint planning, implementation, and review of fieldwork.   Students enrolled in ANTH 303/ ENGR 397 are eligible to travel to Uganda to participate in project activities over Spring Break. Travelers must be enrolled in ENGR 350U.   This course is an approved SAGES Departmental Seminar.  A student in the Case School of Engineering may use this course to meet an Engineering Core Breadth requirement, either in place of ENGL 398 and ENGR 398, or as a Social Science course (ANTH 303 cross-list).  No student may count the course to satisfy both of these requirements.  Offered as ANTH 303 and ENGR 397. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Passing letter grade in a first year seminar in FSCC, FSSO, FSSY, FSNA, FSCS or FSTS.
ENGR 398	Professional Communication for Engineers	1 Unit	Students will attend lectures on global, economic, environmental, and societal issues in engineering, which will be the basis for class discussions, written assignments and oral presentations in ENGL 398.  Recommended preparation: ENGL 150 or FSCC 100 or equivalent and concurrent enrollment in ENGL 398 (ENGL 398 and ENGR 398 together form an approved SAGES departmental seminar). Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq or Coreq: ENGL 398.  Prereq: Prereq: 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGR 400C	Graduate Cooperative Education	0 Unit	An academic opportunity designed for graduate students to enhance their classroom, laboratory, and research learning through participation and experience in various organizational/industrial environments where theory is applied to practice. Graduate Cooperative Education experiences may be integrated with the student's thesis or research project areas, or be solely for the purpose of gaining professional experience related to the student's major field of study. Registration in this course will serve to maintain full-time student status for the period of time that the student is on a co-op assignment.
ENGR 401C	Graduate Cooperative Education	0 Unit	An academic opportunity designed for graduate students to enhance their classroom, laboratory, and research learning through participation and experience in various organizational/industrial environments where theory is applied to practice. Graduate Cooperative Education experiences may be integrated with the student's thesis or research project areas, or be solely for the purpose of gaining professional experience related to the student's major field of study. Registration in this course will serve to maintain full-time student status for the period of time that the student is on a co-op assignment. Prereq: ENGR 400C.
ENGR 410C	Graduate Cooperative Education Part-time	0 Unit	An academic opportunity designed for graduate students to enhance their classroom, laboratory, and research learning through participation and experience in various organizational/industrial environments where theory is applied to practice. Graduate Cooperative Education experiences may be integrated with the student's thesis or research project areas, or be solely for the purpose of gaining professional experience related to the student's major field of study. This is a 0 credit course that allows students to enroll in the co-op program while working up to 20 hours per week. Students must be enrolled as a full-time student to be eligible for this course. Proof of full-time enrollment is required.
ENGR 420A	Introduction to Advanced Statistics in Healthcare	2 Units	Healthcare has been disrupted by the entry of new technologies in the digital Age. Particularly with the advent and increased adoption of of automation, machine learning and artificial intelligence (AI), doctors, hospitals, insurance companies, and industries with ties to healthcare have all been impacted. This course will discuss various challenges and potential areas of automation, exposure to medical ethics including the Declaration of Helsinki. Students will learn different experimental techniques for collection of epidemiological and normative data, understand the difference between incidence and prevalence of a disease, between association and causation, and between validity and reliability of measuring techniques. Use of advanced statistics in hospital management and medical research will be covered. This course will cover use cases that require aspects like compiling and analyzing information (like electronic medical records, the international classification of diseases (ICD-10), etc), develop AI programs to collect, store, re-format, and trace data to provide faster, more consistent access. Additionally, the use of advanced statistical and AI techniques in Healthcare will be demonstrated via use cases such as analyzing tests, X-Rays, CT scans, data entry, and other mundane tasks that can potentially reduce the operational cost. Prereq: ENGR 420B and ENGR 420F.
ENGR 420B	Introduction to Applied Statistics for Decision Support in Data Science	3 Units	Statistics and Probability are tools that can be used to get insights from data and thereby solutions to engineering and business problems. It is mostly assumed that beginners who are learning Machine Learning have some background in statistics and this course will provide the required skills. Descriptive Statistics are used to transform raw data into information and inferential statistics are used to analyze the whole data from samples of data. These form the prerequisite to the field of applied machine learning.  Recommended preparation: familiarity with calculus and linear algebra at the higher secondary level.
ENGR 420C	Artificial Intelligence: Sequential Decision Making	2 Units	This introduces advanced AI models in the areas of computer vision and natural language processing as well as reinforcement learning techniques along with their implementation for industrial applications. The primary focus is on deep learning based modeling with a brief introduction to traditional computer vision and NLP techniques. The course begins with introduction to 'tensorflow' a scalable and deployable programming platform for building neural network architectures. The first theory lecture introduces to the world of computer vision along with traditional approaches and a comparison is drawn between traditional methods and DL for computer vision. In the following lectures multiple advanced neural network architectures are taught along with their application usecases (visual inspection, medical imaging, object detection, OCR, Face recognition, video analysis, etc.). Computer vision is followed by introduction to NLP and traditional techniques like HMMs and CRFs followed by DL architectures for sequence (text, video, audio, speech etc.) modeling. Different application usecases (NER, language modeling, speech recognition, etc.) along along with required theory are presented. Introduction to reinforcement learning and its combination with deep learning is presented towards the end of the course. During the labs all steps of building an application, from the training of the model to its deployment, are discussed. How to combine traditional methods with DL and possible usecases are also discussed. The objective of the course is to make the participants familiar with the state-of-the-art DL and RL techniques for real world problems along with the knowledge to implement solution pipelines. The participants are expected to have very good knowledge of programming platforms like Python (or others) and they must be familiar with machine learning, basic DL techniques (MLP, CNN, RNN and LSTM). Prereq: ENGR 420B, ENGR 420E, and ENGR 420F.
ENGR 420D	Introduction to Contemporary Issues in Data Mining and Big Data	3 Units	Eighty percent of the data available in the world since the dawn of Humanity has been generated in the last five years and it is not just structured but there is a variety to it (like, text, images, audio, video, etc.). Vast amount of data is being collected in medical and social research and in many industries. Such big data generates a demand for efficient and practical tools to analyze the data and to identify unknown patterns. This has created a lot of issues in building effective Data Mining and Data Science solutions. Hadoop technology platform deals with massive volumes/varieties and fast-growing data have come up in recent years to deal with such contemporary issues.  Apache Spark, the unified analytics engine, has seen rapid adoption by enterprises across a wide range of industries. Data scientists, analysts, and general business intelligence users rely on interactive SQL queries for exploring data, deal with streams of data, build Machine Learning models to use the predictive power and draw business insights. This course will help students handle such issues in data science through use of Big data techniques and tools. Prereq: ENGR 420B, ENGR 420E, and ENGR 420F.
ENGR 420E	Introduction to Data Mining and Visualization Techniques	3 Units	Industry today is looking for someone who can develop data science solutions using open source tools and technologies. The languages such as "R" and "Python" play a significant role facilitating the building of statistical and data science models and approaches to visualize data and making predictions to support decisions. The languages are taught from basics such as objects, data types, functions, control structures, etc., that are essential to read and manipulate a lot of structured data. Some of the basic skills like data acquisition, analysis, dealing with inconsistencies within the data and cleansing, transforming the data as required for further modeling and several other traits to prepare the data will be taught. It is also a common practice to begin the data analysis by visualizing the data in addition to computing summary descriptive statistics.  Well-designed visualization techniques can decrease cognitive workload, provide simpler perceptual inferences and improve comprehension of large sets of data to facilitate decision making.  Techniques and algorithms for creating effective visualizations will be covered along with the required basics of R, Python and Tableau to generate descriptive statistics, run experiments and draw inferences, visualize the data and present a data story.
ENGR 420F	Introduction to Methods and Algorithms for Machine Learning	3 Units	Traditional statistical methods and Machine learning methods coexist, and it is essential for every Data Science enthusiast to learn both and exploit them as they deem fit. Machine Learning is an algorithm that can learn from data without relying on rules-based programming. In this course a variety of machine learning techniques (supervised learning and unsupervised learning), with data examples from biomedical and social research will be covered. Specifically, prediction model building and model-based feature selections, classification (tree-based methods, bagging, random forests, boosting, support vector machines, association rules, clustering and hierarchical clustering, k-nearest neighbors will be covered. Industry case studies will be used to provide students an overview of how a data science project is executed and help them learn all the components of the data science pipeline, and to carry out descriptive, predictive and prescriptive analytics. For a given use case, we teach how to choose between a variety of tools and techniques that suit the problem statement and at every stage how to validate the choice and tune the model performance. When it comes to solving real-world problems for any industry it is equally important to know how to work with all the stakeholders in the organization and build plugins that the business can use. Some of the important aspects like architecting a solution, production deployment and how to deal with challenges and some best practices will be covered. Additionally, this course is designed to broaden the learning horizons and introduce students to unstructured data (Natural Language and computer vision). Some of the state-of-the-art tools and techniques to build supervised and unsupervised approaches to build systems that can-do intelligent things will be introduced. It includes ANN, Deep learning, Convolution nets, RNN and LSTMs. The course goes into details of architecture, implementation and mathematical background of SOTA NLP and computer vision techniques and then build several interesting applications. This program provides a good overview of how learned techniques can be used to build interesting commercial applications in healthcare, medicine, biometrics, speech, OCR, etc. We also dive deep into the engineering aspects and enable participants to think of possibilities in other domains as well. Additionally, another branch of mathematical models, namely Optimization techniques will be covered to build intelligent systems. Recommended preparation: ENGR 420B or concepts covered in that class.
ENGR 600	M.S. Engineering Culminating Experience	0 Unit	Culminating experience for MS course focused track in engineering. Prereq: M.S. student in Engineering - course focused track.
ENGL 145	Utopia, Dystopia, and Scientific Modernity Sixteenth-Century to the Present	3 Units	A utopia is a dream of a better world; a dystopia is a nightmare of a worse one. Both are fantasies. Yet both respond to the very real technological, political and cultural conditions in which they are written. This multidisciplinary course uses utopian and dystopian literature from the sixteenth century to the present to investigate the rise of scientific modernity and the responses it provoked. Starting with Thomas More's Utopia, and ending with Octavia Butler's The Parable of the Sower and a contemporary film, students will read important utopian and dystopian works of fiction and connect them to themes that run through the history of science: the relationship between knowledge and power; the impact of new technologies; voyages of exploration and exploitation; industrialization and forms of production; ideas of gender, race, and class; nuclear power; genetics; and climate change. We encourage students to ask what led to these specific critiques or ideas, and why? What limits or determines the boundaries of the possible or the desirable to each author? And how might these still be relevant today? Offered as ENGL 145 and HSTY 145. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ENGL 146	Tools, Not Rules: English Grammar for Writers	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to English grammar in context for academic writers. It focuses on the study of language in use, including parts of speech, sentence grammar, paragraph structure, and text cohesion. This course is specifically designed for multilingual students, but native speakers of English may take the course with the approval of the instructor.
ENGL 147	Writing Across Disciplines	3 Units	In this course, students will develop their genre knowledge and metacognitive skills to prepare for the advanced writing, reading, and research tasks required in upper-level writing and disciplinary courses across the university. Through individual and group inquiry, students will analyze and discuss the conventions of academic genres to understand the textual and linguistic features and disciplinary expectations of each form of writing. Then, students will apply these generic conventions through the production and revision of writing within each genre. Throughout the semester, students will engage in workshops and discussions that foster skills in the areas of seminar participation, collaboration, rhetorical awareness, and critical thinking. This course is specifically designed for non-native speakers of English, but native speakers may take the course with the approval of the instructor.
ENGL 148	Introduction to Composition	3 Units	Practice and training in various modes and genres of writing. Undergraduate CIM students placed into ENGL 148 must complete the course with a grade of C or higher in order to enroll in ENGL 150.
ENGL 149	Emerging Writers Studio	3 Units	Introduction to the academic writing process in an intensive seminar and workshop environment.  Course includes training and practice in prewriting, drafting, revising and editing.
ENGL 150	Expository Writing	3 Units	Substantial training and practice in academic writing.
ENGL 155	Introduction to Rhetoric and Public Speaking	3 Units	This course will focus on the theories of rhetoric, the work of developing and preparing a speech and on the art and skill of delivering various kinds of oral presentations.  The assignments will: a) Introduce students to the traditions, theories and core principles of public speaking, from Aristotle's Rhetoric to Cicero to Kenneth Burke. b) Engage them in the five-part "canon of rhetoric" for developing speeches. c) Give them opportunities to develop and deliver several different types of classic speeches, both as a speaker and as a speechwriter.
ENGL 180	Writing Tutorial	1 Unit	Substantial scheduled tutorial work in writing.
ENGL 183	Academic Writing Studio	1 Unit	Practice and training in various aspects of academic writing in a small group workshop environment. Please note: only one semester hour of ENGL 183 will count toward a degree, but the course may be repeated.
ENGL 186	Writing Workshop for Researchers	2 Units	Individualized writing workshop/tutorial for graduate students, faculty, and staff. Includes small group workshops and individualized instruction in genres and forms of academic and research writing.
ENGL 200	Literature in English	3 Units	This course introduces students to the reading of literature in the English language. Through close attention to the practice of reading, students are invited to consider some of the characteristic forms and functions imaginative literature has taken, together with some of the changes that have taken place in what and how readers read.
ENGL 203	Introduction to Creative Writing	3 Units	A course exploring basic issues and techniques of writing narrative prose and verse through exercises, analysis, and experiment.  For students who wish to try their abilities across a spectrum of genres.
ENGL 204	Introduction to Journalism	3 Units	Students will learn the basics of reporting and writing news stories, but also the traditions behind the craft and the evolving role of journalism in society.  Instruction will include interviewing skills, fact-checking, word choice and story structure--all framed by guidance on making ethically sound decisions.  Assignments could include stories from a variety of beats (business, entertainment, government, science), along with deadline stories and breaking news Web updates, profiles and obituaries.
ENGL 213	Introduction to Fiction Writing	3 Units	A beginning workshop in fiction writing, introducing such concepts as voice, point of view, plot, characterization, dialogue, description, and the like.  May include discussion of literary examples, both classic and contemporary, along with student work.
ENGL 214	Introduction to Poetry Writing	3 Units	A beginning workshop, focusing on such elements of poetry as verse-form, syntax, figures, sound, tone.  May include discussion of literary examples as well as student work.
ENGL 217A	Business and Professional Writing	3 Units	An introduction to professional communication in theory and practice.  Special attention paid to audience analysis, persuasive techniques in written and oral communication, document design strategies, and ethical communication practices. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 217B	Writing for the Health Professions	3 Units	This course offers practice and training in the professional and technical writing skills common to health professions (e.g., medicine, nursing, dentistry). Attention will be paid to the writing processes of drafting, revising, and editing. Typical assignments include: letters, resumes, personal essays, professional communication genres (e.g., email, reports, patient charts, and histories), and scholarly genres (e.g., abstracts, articles, and reviews). Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 257A	The Novel	3 Units	Introductory readings in the novel.  May be organized chronologically or thematically.  Some attention to the novel as a historically situated genre.
ENGL 257B	Poetry	3 Units	Introductory readings in poetry.  May be organized chronologically or thematically.  Attention to the formal qualities of poetry in relation to meaning, expressivity, etc.
ENGL 270	Introduction to Gender Studies	3 Units	This course introduces women and men students to the methods and concepts of gender studies, women's studies, and feminist theory.  An interdisciplinary course, it covers approaches used in literary criticism, history, philosophy, political science, sociology, anthropology, psychology, film studies, cultural studies, art history, and religion.  It is the required introductory course for students taking the women's and gender studies major. Offered as ENGL 270, HSTY 270, PHIL 270, RLGN 270, SOCI 201, and WGST 201. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 285	Special Topics Seminar	3 Units	Seminars on special topics in literature or language.  Maximum of 3 credits.
ENGL 290	Masterpieces of Continental Fiction	3 Units	Major works of fiction from the 19th century and earlier. Offered as ENGL 290 and WLIT 290.
ENGL 300	English Literature to 1800	3 Units	A survey of major British authors from Chaucer to Milton and Dryden. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 301	Linguistic Analysis	3 Units	Analysis of modern English from various theoretical perspectives: structural, generative, discourse analytical, sociolinguistic, psycholinguistic, and cognitive linguistic.  Some attention to the major dialects of American English. Offered as ENGL 301 and ENGL 401. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 302	English Literature since 1800	3 Units	A survey of major British authors from Wordsworth to the present. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 303	Intermediate Writing Workshop: Fiction	3 Units	Continues developing the concepts and practice of the introductory courses, with reading, writing, and discussion of fiction in various forms, including the short story, the novella and the novel.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 303 and ENGL 303C. Prereq: ENGL 203 or ENGL 213.
ENGL 303C	Intermediate Fiction Capstone	3 Units	This Capstone course continues developing the concepts and practice of the introductory courses, with reading, writing, and discussion of fiction in various forms, including the short story, the novella and the novel. Offered as ENGL 303 and ENGL 303C. Students taking this course for their SAGES Capstone will not be repeating material they covered in ENGL 303.  Students registering for ENGL 303C will be required to develop and complete a Capstone project, which will include a minimum of two short stories (or an alternative writing project developed in conjunction with the instructor) and a critical introduction to the project. Capstone students will also make a public presentation of their work. Offered as ENGL 303 and ENGL 303C. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: (ENGL 203 or 213), ENGL 303 and ENGL 380.
ENGL 304	Intermediate Writing Workshop: Poetry	3 Units	Continues developing the concepts and practice of the introductory courses, with emphasis on experiment and revision as well as consideration of poetic genres through examples from established poets.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 304 and ENGL 304C. Prereq: ENGL 203 or ENGL 214.
ENGL 304C	Poetry Writing Capstone	3 Units	This Capstone course continues developing the concepts and practice of the introductory courses, with emphasis on experiment and revision as well as consideration of poetic genres through examples from established poets. Offered as ENGL 304 and ENGL 304C.  There will be a midterm presentation and a Capstone poetry project. Students taking this course for their SAGES Capstone will not be repeating material they covered in ENGL 304. They will be required to complete 25 pages of creative writing and 15 pages of critical writing and attend some separate meetings to discuss their progress on the Capstone project. Capstone students will also be required to present reports on their research projects at a public Capstone presentation at the end of the semester. Offered as ENGL 304 and ENGL 304C. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: (ENGL 214 or 203), ENGL 304 and ENGL 380.
ENGL 305	Playwriting	3 Units	Theory and practice of dramatic writing, in the context of examples, classic and contemporary.  Recommended preparation: ENGL 203 or ENGL 213 or ENGL 214 or ENGL 303 or ENGL 304.   Offered as ENGL 305, THTR 312 and THTR 412.
ENGL 306	Intermediate Writing Workshop: Creative Non-Fiction	3 Units	A writing workshop that focuses on non-fiction. Students will study and write narrative journalism, the memoir, and the personal essay. Maximum 6 credits. Prereq: ENGL 203 or ENGL 213 or ENGL 214.
ENGL 307	Feature/Magazine Writing	3 Units	Continues developing the concepts and practices of the introductory course, with emphasis on feature writing for magazines (print and online), story structure, fact-checking, reporting techniques and freelancing. A student may not receive credit for both ENGL 307 and ENGL 307C. Offered as ENGL 307 and ENGL 307C. Prereq: ENGL 204 or instructor approval.
ENGL 307C	Feature/Magazine Writing Capstone	3 Units	This Capstone course continues developing the concepts and practices of the introductory course, with emphasis on feature writing for magazines (print and online), story structure, fact-checking, reporting techniques and freelancing. Students registering for 307C will be required to develop and complete a Capstone project in the wider field of study covered by the course and to make a public presentation of this project. The Capstone version of the class (307C) will expand the requirements to include a student-conceived magazine-length feature story independently overseen by the instructor, along with a reflective essay, pitch letter to a magazine, and oral presentation. A student may not receive credit for both ENGL 307 and ENGL 307C. Offered as ENGL 307 and ENGL 307C. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: ENGL 204 and ENGL 380 or requisites not met permission.
ENGL 308	American Literature	3 Units	A survey of major American authors from the Puritans to the present. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 309	Immersion Journalism/Multimedia Storytelling	3 Units	Students will spend the bulk of the semester documenting lives and stories from a local nursing home through audio slideshows and video projects. A student may not receive credit for both ENGL 309 and ENGL 309C. Offered as ENGL 309 and ENGL 309C. Prereq: ENGL 204 or instructor approval.
ENGL 309C	Multimedia Storytelling Capstone	3 Units	This Capstone course will require that students spend the bulk of the semester documenting lives and stories from a local nursing home through audio slideshows and video projects. Students who register for 309C to fulfill their SAGES Capstone requirement will individually plan, shoot and edit a 7-10 minute documentary, compose a 15 page reflective essay, and complete an oral presentation. A student may not receive credit for both ENGL 309 and ENGL 309C. Offered as ENGL 309 and ENGL 309C. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: ENGL 204 and ENGL 380 or requisites not met permission.
ENGL 310	History of the English Language	3 Units	An introductory course covering the major periods of English language development: Old, Middle, and Modern.  Students will examine both the linguistic forms and the cultures in which the forms were used.   Offered as ENGL 310 and ENGL 410. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 312	Chaucer	3 Units	An introduction to the work of Geoffrey Chaucer, with emphasis on "The Canterbury Tales." A student may not receive credit for both ENGL 312 and ENGL 312C. Offered as ENGL 312 and ENGL 312C. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 312C	Chaucer Capstone	3 Units	This capstone course is an introduction to the work of Geoffrey Chaucer, with emphasis on "The Canterbury Tales." Students registering for 312C will be required to develop and complete a Capstone project in the wider field of study covered by the course and to make a public presentation of this project. A student may not receive credit for both ENGL 312 and ENGL 312C. Offered as ENGL 312 and ENGL 312C. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: ENGL 380 and (ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS).
ENGL 314	Advanced Playwriting	3 Units	Theory and practice of dramatic writing with special focus on the craft of writing a full-length play. Offered as ENGL 314, THTR 314 and THTR 414. Prereq: ENGL 305 or THTR 312.
ENGL 316	Screenwriting	3 Units	A critical exploration of the craft of writing for film, in which reading and practicum assignments will culminate in the student submitting an original full-length screenplay. Offered as ENGL 316, THTR 316 and THTR 416. Prereq: THTR 316 or ENGL 305 or THTR 412.
ENGL 320	Renaissance Literature	3 Units	Aspects of English Renaissance literature and its contexts from 1500-ca. 1620.  Genres studied might include poetry, drama, prose fiction, expository and polemic writing, or some works from Continental Europe.  Writers such as Skelton, More, Erasmus, Wyatt, Sidney, Spenser, Marlowe, Lanier, Wroth, Shakespeare, Donne.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 320 and ENGL 420. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 323	Milton	3 Units	Poetry and selected prose, including the careful study of "Paradise Lost." Offered as ENGL 323 and ENGL 423. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 324	Shakespeare: Histories and Tragedies	3 Units	Close reading of a selection of Shakespeare's tragedies and history plays (e.g., "Richard the Third," "Julius Caesar," "Hamlet," "King Lear").  Topics of discussion may include Renaissance drama as a social institution, the nature of tragedy, national history, gender roles, sexual politics, the state and its opponents, theatrical conventions.  Assessment may include opportunities for performance. A student may not receive credit for both ENGL 324 and ENGL 324C. Offered as ENGL 324, ENGL 324C, ENGL 424, and THTR 334. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 324C	Shakespeare: Histories and Tragedies Capstone	3 Units	Close reading of a selection of Shakespeare's tragedies and history plays (e.g., "Richard the Third," "Julius Caesar," "Hamlet," "King Lear"). Topics of discussion may include Renaissance drama as a social institution, the nature of tragedy, national history, gender roles, sexual politics, the state and its opponents, theatrical conventions. Assessment may include opportunities for performance. Students registering for 324C will be required to develop and complete a Capstone project in the wider field of study covered by the course and to make a public presentation of this project. A student may not receive credit for both ENGL 324 and ENGL 324C. Offered as ENGL 324, ENGL 324C, ENGL 424, and THTR 334. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: ENGL 380 and (ENGL 310 or 312 or 320 or 323 or 325 or 327 or 328 or 329).
ENGL 325	Shakespeare: Comedies and Romances	3 Units	Close reading of selected plays of Shakespeare in the genres of comedy and romance (e.g., "The Merchant of Venice," "Twelfth Night," "Measure for Measure," "The Tempest").  Topics of discussion may include issues of sexual desire, gender roles, marriage, the family, genre conventions.  Assessment may include opportunities for performance. A student may not receive credit for both ENGL 325 and ENGL 325C. Offered as ENGL 325, ENGL 325C, ENGL 425, and THTR 335. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 325C	Shakespeare: Comedies/Romances Capstone	3 Units	Close reading of selected plays of Shakespeare in the genres of comedy and romance (e.g., "The Merchant of Venice," "Twelfth Night," "Measure for Measure," "The Tempest"). Topics of discussion may include issues of sexual desire, gender roles, marriage, the family, genre conventions. Assessment may include opportunities for performance. Students registering for 325C will be required to develop and complete a Capstone project in the wider field of study covered by the course and to make a public presentation of this project. A student may not receive credit for both ENGL 325 and ENGL 325C. Offered as ENGL 325, ENGL 325C, ENGL 425, and THTR 335. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: ENGL 380 and (ENGL 310 or ENGL 312 or ENGL 320 or ENGL 323 or ENGL 324 or ENGL 327 or ENGL 328 or ENGL 329).
ENGL 328	Studies in the Eighteenth Century	3 Units	This course examines selected topics in the English literary culture of the eighteenth century, a culture which extended to the Americas and to other English colonies. Literary writings will be examined in relation to other aspects of the century's culture, which may include visual arts, marital institutions, the printing industry, property law, medicine, and other topics. Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 328, ENGL 328C and ENGL 428. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 328C	Studies in 18th Century Capstone	3 Units	This Capstone course examines selected topics in the English literary culture of the eighteenth century, a culture which extended to the Americas and to other English colonies. Literary writings will be examined in relation to other aspects of the century's culture, which may include visual arts, marital institutions, the printing industry, property law, medicine, and other topics. Students registering for 328C will be required to develop and complete a Capstone project in the wider field of study covered by the course and to make a public presentation of this project. A student who has previously taken ENGL 328 may receive credit for ENGL 328C only if the themes/topics are different. Offered as ENGL 328, ENGL 328C and ENGL 428. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: ENGL 380 and (ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS).
ENGL 330	Victorian Literature	3 Units	Aspects of English literature and its contexts during the reign of Queen Victoria.  Genres studied might include poetry, prose fiction, political and philosophical writing.  Writers such as the Brontes, Gaskell, Dickens, Eliot, Hardy, Tennyson, the Brownings, Arnold, Carlyle, Ruskin, Gosse, Swinburne, and Hopkins.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 330, ENGL 330C and ENGL 430. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 330C	Victorian Literature Capstone	3 Units	This Capstone course studies aspects of English literature and its contexts during the reign of Queen Victoria. Genres studied might include poetry, prose fiction, political and philosophical writing. Writers such as the Brontes, Gaskell, Dickens, Eliot, Hardy, Tennyson, the Brownings, Arnold, Carlyle, Ruskin, Gosse, Swinburne, and Hopkins. Students registering for 330C will be required to develop and complete a Capstone project in the wider field of study covered by the course and to make a public presentation of this project. A student who has previously taken ENGL 330 may receive credit for ENGL 330C only if the themes/topics are different. Offered as ENGL 330, ENGL 330C and ENGL 430. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: ENGL 380 and (ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS).
ENGL 331	Studies in the Nineteenth-Century	3 Units	Individual topics in English literary culture of the 19th century.  Topics might be thematic or formal, such as literature and science; medicine; labor; sexuality; Empire; literature and other arts; Gothic fiction; decadence.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 331, ENGL 331C and ENGL 431. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 331C	Studies in the Nineteenth Century Capstone	3 Units	This Capstone course studies individual topics in English literary culture of the 19th century.  Topics might be thematic or formal, such as literature and science; medicine; labor; sexuality; Empire; literature and other arts; Gothic fiction; decadence.  Students registering for 331C will be required to develop and complete a Capstone project in the wider field of study covered by the course and to make a public presentation of this project. A student who has previously taken ENGL 331 may receive credit for ENGL 331C only if the themes/topics are different. Offered as ENGL 331, ENGL 331C and ENGL 431. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: ENGL 380 and (ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS).
ENGL 345	Topics in LGBTQ Studies	3 Units	This course will focus on selected topics in the study of LGBTQ literature, film, theory, and culture. Individual courses may focus on such topics as queer theory, LGBTQ literature, queer cinema, gay and lesbian poetry, LGBTQ graphic novels, the AIDS memoir, AIDS/Gay Drama, and queer rhetoric and protest. Maximum 6 credits.  Offered as ENGL 345, ENGL 445 and WGST 345. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 345C	Topics in LGBTQ Studies Capstone	3 Units	This Capstone course will focus on selected topics in the study of LGBTQ literature, film, theory, and culture. Individual courses may focus on such topics as queer theory, LGBTQ literature, queer cinema, gay and lesbian poetry, LGBTQ graphic novels, the AIDS memoir, queer new media, AIDS activism, and AIDS/Gay Drama. Students registering for 345C will be required to develop and complete a Capstone project in the wider field of study covered by the course and to make a public presentation of this project. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. A student who has previously taken ENGL 345 may receive credit for ENGL 345C only if the themes/topics are different. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 380 and (ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS).
ENGL 353	Major Writers	3 Units	Close and detailed study of the work of one or two writers: development, social and aesthetic contexts, reception, interpretation, significance.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 353 and ENGL 453. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 358	American Literature 1914-1960	3 Units	Aspects of American literature and its contexts from the First World War to the Cold War. Genres studied might include fiction, poetry, drama, polemics. Writers such as T.S. Eliot, Pound, Stevens, Moore, W.C. Williams, Dos Passos, West, Fitzgerald, Hemingway, Cather, Faulkner, Barnes, Miller, T. Williams, O'Neill. Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 358 and ENGL 458. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 358C	American Literature, 1914-1960 Capstone	3 Units	This Capstone course presents aspects of American literature and its contexts from the First World War to the Cold War. Genres studied might include fiction, poetry, drama, polemics. Writers such as T.S. Eliot, Pound, Stevens, Moore, W.C. Williams, Dos Passos, West, Fitzgerald, Hemingway, Cather, Faulkner, Barnes, Miller, T. Williams, O'Neill. Students registering for 358C will be required to develop and complete a Capstone project in the wider field of study covered by the course and to make a public presentation of this project. A student who has previously taken ENGL 358 may receive credit for ENGL 358C only if the themes/topics are different. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: ENGL 380 and (ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS).
ENGL 360	Studies in American Literature	3 Units	Individual topics in American literary culture such as regionalism, realism, impressionism, literature and popular culture, transcendentalism, the lyric, proletarian literature, the legacy of the Civil War.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 360 and ENGL 460. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 365E	The Immigrant Experience	3 Units	Study of fictional and/or autobiographical narrative by authors whose families have experienced immigration to the U.S. Among the ethnic groups represented are Asian-American, Jewish-American, Hispanic-American.  May include several ethnic groups or focus on a single one.  Attention is paid to historical and social aspects of immigration and ethnicity.  Maximum 6 credits.  Offered as  ENGL 365E, ENGL 365EC, ENGL 465E, WLIT 365E and WLIT 465E. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 365EC	The Immigrant Experience Capstone	3 Units	Study of fictional and/or autobiographical narrative by authors whose families have experienced immigration to the U.S. Among the ethnic groups represented are Asian-American, Jewish-American, Hispanic-American. May include several ethnic groups or focus on a single one. Attention is paid to historical and social aspects of immigration and ethnicity. Students registering for 365EC will be required to develop and complete a Capstone project in the wider field of study covered by the course and to make a public presentation of this project. A student who has previously taken ENGL 358 may receive credit for ENGL 358C only if the themes/topics are different. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.  Offered as  ENGL 365E, ENGL 365EC, ENGL 465E, WLIT 365E and WLIT 465E. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 380 and (ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS).
ENGL 365N	Topics in African-American Literature	3 Units	Selected topics and writers from nineteenth, twentieth, and twenty-first century African-American literature.  May focus on a genre, a single author or a group of authors, a theme or themes.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as AFST 365N, ENGL 365N, ETHS 365N, WLIT 365N, ENGL 465N, and WLIT 465N. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 365NC	Topics in African American LIterature Capstone	3 Units	Selected topics and writers from nineteenth, twentieth, and twenty-first century African-American literature. May focus on a genre, a single author or a group of authors, a theme or themes. Students registering for 365NC will be required to develop and complete a Capstone project in the wider field of study covered by the course and to make a public presentation of this project. A student who has previously taken ENGL 365N, ETHS 365N, or WLIT 365N may receive credit for ENGL 365NC only if the themes/topics are different. Offered as ENGL 365N, ENGL 465N,  ETHS 365N, WLIT 365N, and WLIT 465N. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 380 and (ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS).
ENGL 365Q	Post-Colonial Literature	3 Units	Readings in national and regional literatures from former European colonies such as Australia and African countries.  Maximum 6 credits.  Offered as ENGL 365Q, ENGL 365QC, ETHS 365Q, WLIT 365Q, ENGL 465Q, and WLIT 465Q. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 365QC	Post-Colonial Literature-Capstone	3 Units	Readings in national and regional literature of former Anglophone European colonies. Students may receive credit both for ENGL 365Q and for ENGL 365QC when course topics differ between the offerings. Offered as ENGL 365Q, ENGL 365QC, ETHS 365Q, WLIT 365Q, ENGL 465Q, and WLIT 465Q. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 380 and a declared major in English.
ENGL 367	Introduction to Film	3 Units	An introduction to the art of film. Each week we'll take an element of film form (editing, cinematography, sound, and so on) and ask how filmmakers work with this element to produce effects. Most weeks we'll also screen a whole film and discuss it in light of the week's focus. Films screened will include masterworks of the silent era, foreign films, Hollywood studio-era classics, and more recent cinema. This course has no prerequisites and welcomes first year students. Offered as ENGL 367 and ENGL 467.
ENGL 368	Topics in Film	3 Units	Individual topics include Horror Films, Storytelling & Cinema, Science Fiction Films, Films of Alfred Hitchcock, American Cinema & Culture, History of Cinema, and many others. This course has no prerequisites and welcomes first year students. Other than the number of credits from one department a student can apply toward graduating, there is no limit to the number of times Topics in Film can be taken. A student who has previously taken ENGL 368C may receive credit for ENGL 368 only if the themes/topics are different. Offered as ENGL 368, ENGL 468, WLIT 368, and WLIT 468.
ENGL 368C	Topics in Film Capstone	3 Units	Individual topics include Horror Films, Storytelling & Cinema, Science Fiction Films, Films of Alfred Hitchcock, American Cinema & Culture, History of Cinema, and many others. Students registering for ENGL 368C will be required to develop and complete a Capstone project in the wider field of study covered by the course and to make a public presentation of this project. Students must be a declared English Major with Concentration in Film or both English Major and Film Minor. Permission of instructor must be received prior to the last day of classes the previous semester. A student who has previously taken ENGL 368 may receive credit for ENGL 368C only if the themes/topics are different. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: ENGL 380 and (ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS).
ENGL 369	Children's Literature	3 Units	Individual topics in 19th-, 20th-, and 21st-century children's literature.  Topics may focus on narrative and thematic developments in the genre, historical contexts, literary influences, or adaptations of children's literature into film and other media. Offered as ENGL 369 and ENGL 469. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 370	Comics and the Graphic Novel	3 Units	Selected topics in the study and analysis of comics and the graphic novel. Topics may include historical contexts of the genre, visual rhetoric, thematic developments, influence of literature, adaptations into film. A student may not receive credit for both ENGL 370 and ENGL 370C. Offered as ENGL 370, ENGL 370C, and ENGL 470. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 370C	Comics and the Graphic Novel Capstone	3 Units	Selected topics in the study and analysis of comics and the graphic novel. Topics may include historical contexts of the genre, visual rhetoric, thematic developments, influence of literature, adaptations into film. Students registering for 370C will be required to develop and complete a Capstone project in the wider field of study covered by the course and to make a public presentation of this project. A student may not receive credit for both ENGL 370 and ENGL 370C. Offered as ENGL 370, ENGL 370C, and ENGL 470. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: ENGL 380 and (ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS).
ENGL 372	Studies in the Novel	3 Units	Selected topics in the history and formal development of the novel, such as detective novels; science fiction; epistolary novels; the rise of the novel; the stream of consciousness novel; the Bildungsroman in English.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 372 and ENGL 472. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 372C	Studies in the Novel Capstone	3 Units	This Capstone course studies selected topics in the history and formal development of the novel, such as detective novels; science fiction; epistolary novels; the rise of the novel; the stream of consciousness novel; the Bildungsroman in English. Students registering for 372C will be required to develop and complete a Capstone project in the wider field of study covered by the course and to make a public presentation of this project.  A student who has previously taken ENGL 372 may receive credit for ENGL 372C only if the themes/topics are different. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: ENGL 380 and (ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS).
ENGL 373	American Women's Poetry	3 Units	This course surveys American women's poetry from the seventeenth century to the present. We will read a range of poetry illustrating the roles of women poets in the development of the nation's literary, cultural, and social history. We will pay close attention to how women poets use traditional and innovative poetic forms to represent lived experiences and to engage the political realities of their varying historical moments Offered as ENGL 373, ENGL 473, and WGST 374. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 374	Internship in Journalism	3 - 6 Units	Students work as interns at area newspapers, magazines, trade publications, radio or television and meet as a class to share their experiences as interns and to focus on editorial issues--reporting, writing, fact-checking, editing--that are a part of any journalistic enterprise.  Students are responsible for pre-arranging their internship prior to the semester they intend to take the class but can expect guidance from the instructor in this regard. Recommended preparation: ENGL 204 or permission of the department.
ENGL 376	Studies in Genre	3 Units	Topics in literary genres, such as comedy, biography and autobiography, satire, allegory, the short story, the apologue, narrative poetry. May cross over the prose/poetry boundary. Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 376 and ENGL 476. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 380	Departmental Seminar	3 Units	A topical course, emphasizing disciplinary forms of writing.  Required of all English majors, preferable in the junior year; also fulfills a SAGES requirement. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: ENGL 300.
ENGL 385	Special Topics in Literature	3 Units	Close study of a theme or aspect of literature not covered by traditional generic or period rubrics, such as "spatial imagination," "semiotics of fashion in literature," "epistolarity." Maximum 9 credits. Offered as ENGL 385 and ENGL 485. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 386	Studies in Literature and Culture	3 Units	Boundary-crossing study of the relations between literary and other aspects of a particular culture or society, including theoretical and critical issues raised by such study. For example, literature and medicine, law and literature, gay and lesbian literature, Asian/Western literary relations, emotion in literature, philosophy and literature, literature and music. Maximum 9 credits. Offered as ENGL 386 and ENGL 486. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 387	Literary and Critical Theory	3 Units	A survey of major schools and texts of literary and critical theory. May be historically or thematically organized. Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 387, WLIT 387, ENGL 487, and WLIT 487. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 390	Independent Study and Creative Projects	1 - 3 Units	Up to three semester hours of independent study may be taken in a single semester.  Must have prior approval of faculty member directing the project.  Projects may be critical or creative in nature.
ENGL 392	Classroom Teaching	3 Units	For undergraduate students who assist in the teaching of ENGL 150, 180, or 181. Interested students should check with the director of composition (for ENGL 150, 180, 181) before the beginning of the semester in which they wish to participate. May be repeated only once; not more than three semester hours in ENGL 392 may be counted toward the major. May also include up to three semester hours of supervised peer tutoring at the University Writing Center.
ENGL 398	Professional Communication for Engineers	2 Units	A writing course for Engineering students only, covering academic and professional genres of written and oral communication.  Taken in conjunction with Engineering 398, English 398 constitutes an approved SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq or Coreq: ENGR 398.  Prereq: 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ENGL 400	Rhetoric and Teaching of Writing	3 Units	Classical and modern theories of rhetoric; their application in the classroom.  Required of graduate assistants and tutors who have had no prior experience in the teaching of composition. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 401	Linguistic Analysis	3 Units	Analysis of modern English from various theoretical perspectives: structural, generative, discourse analytical, sociolinguistic, psycholinguistic, and cognitive linguistic.  Some attention to the major dialects of American English. Offered as ENGL 301 and ENGL 401. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 406	Advanced Creative Writing	3 Units	Workshop for serious undergraduate and graduate writers.  Offered alternate years; alternates between poetry and fiction.  Admission requires review of writing sample by faculty. Maximum 6 credits. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 410	History of the English Language	3 Units	An introductory course covering the major periods of English language development: Old, Middle, and Modern.  Students will examine both the linguistic forms and the cultures in which the forms were used.   Offered as ENGL 310 and ENGL 410. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 414	Advanced Academic Communication and Presentation	3 Units	In this course, graduate students develop the interactive speaking skills needed to participate effectively in seminar-style discussions and other formal group situations. In addition, the class focuses on the skills international graduate students need to organize and deliver presentations for academic and professional audiences. This class will reinforce and expand on oral communication strategies students learned in the previous semester.
ENGL 415	Academic Research and Writing	3 Units	The course focuses on the skills graduate students need to write research papers. This class will reinforce reading strategies students learned in the previous semester and graduate students will learn to organize ideas, synthesize material from written and other sources, and develop organizational and rhetorical skills appropriate to their discipline. Students will also learn to use reflection and self-assessment to become more independent and competent writers. This class will reinforce and expand on writing strategies students learned in the previous semester. Activities include small group work, analysis of academic texts, writing in a variety of academic genres, revising and editing, and tutorial sessions.
ENGL 420	Renaissance Literature	3 Units	Aspects of English Renaissance literature and its contexts from 1500-ca. 1620.  Genres studied might include poetry, drama, prose fiction, expository and polemic writing, or some works from Continental Europe.  Writers such as Skelton, More, Erasmus, Wyatt, Sidney, Spenser, Marlowe, Lanier, Wroth, Shakespeare, Donne.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 320 and ENGL 420. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 423	Milton	3 Units	Poetry and selected prose, including the careful study of "Paradise Lost." Offered as ENGL 323 and ENGL 423. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 424	Shakespeare: Histories and Tragedies	3 Units	Close reading of a selection of Shakespeare's tragedies and history plays (e.g., "Richard the Third," "Julius Caesar," "Hamlet," "King Lear").  Topics of discussion may include Renaissance drama as a social institution, the nature of tragedy, national history, gender roles, sexual politics, the state and its opponents, theatrical conventions.  Assessment may include opportunities for performance. A student may not receive credit for both ENGL 324 and ENGL 324C. Offered as ENGL 324, ENGL 324C, ENGL 424, and THTR 334. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 425	Shakespeare: Comedies and Romances	3 Units	Close reading of selected plays of Shakespeare in the genres of comedy and romance (e.g., "The Merchant of Venice," "Twelfth Night," "Measure for Measure," "The Tempest").  Topics of discussion may include issues of sexual desire, gender roles, marriage, the family, genre conventions.  Assessment may include opportunities for performance. A student may not receive credit for both ENGL 325 and ENGL 325C. Offered as ENGL 325, ENGL 325C, ENGL 425, and THTR 335. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 428	Studies in the Eighteenth Century	3 Units	This course examines selected topics in the English literary culture of the eighteenth century, a culture which extended to the Americas and to other English colonies. Literary writings will be examined in relation to other aspects of the century's culture, which may include visual arts, marital institutions, the printing industry, property law, medicine, and other topics. Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 328, ENGL 328C and ENGL 428. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 430	Victorian Literature	3 Units	Aspects of English literature and its contexts during the reign of Queen Victoria.  Genres studied might include poetry, prose fiction, political and philosophical writing.  Writers such as the Brontes, Gaskell, Dickens, Eliot, Hardy, Tennyson, the Brownings, Arnold, Carlyle, Ruskin, Gosse, Swinburne, and Hopkins.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 330, ENGL 330C and ENGL 430. Prereq: Graduate standing or permission of instructor.
ENGL 431	Studies in the Nineteenth-Century	3 Units	Individual topics in English literary culture of the 19th century.  Topics might be thematic or formal, such as literature and science; medicine; labor; sexuality; Empire; literature and other arts; Gothic fiction; decadence.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 331, ENGL 331C and ENGL 431. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 445	Topics in LGBTQ Studies	3 Units	This course will focus on selected topics in the study of LGBTQ literature, film, theory, and culture. Individual courses may focus on such topics as queer theory, LGBTQ literature, queer cinema, gay and lesbian poetry, LGBTQ graphic novels, the AIDS memoir, AIDS/Gay Drama, and queer rhetoric and protest. Maximum 6 credits.  Offered as ENGL 345, ENGL 445 and WGST 345. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ENGL 453	Major Writers	3 Units	Close and detailed study of the work of one or two writers: development, social and aesthetic contexts, reception, interpretation, significance.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 353 and ENGL 453. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 458	American Literature 1914-1960	3 Units	Aspects of American literature and its contexts from the First World War to the Cold War. Genres studied might include fiction, poetry, drama, polemics. Writers such as T.S. Eliot, Pound, Stevens, Moore, W.C. Williams, Dos Passos, West, Fitzgerald, Hemingway, Cather, Faulkner, Barnes, Miller, T. Williams, O'Neill. Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 358 and ENGL 458. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 460	Studies in American Literature	3 Units	Individual topics in American literary culture such as regionalism, realism, impressionism, literature and popular culture, transcendentalism, the lyric, proletarian literature, the legacy of the Civil War.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 360 and ENGL 460. Prereq: Graduate standing or permission of instructor.
ENGL 465E	The Immigrant Experience	3 Units	Study of fictional and/or autobiographical narrative by authors whose families have experienced immigration to the U.S. Among the ethnic groups represented are Asian-American, Jewish-American, Hispanic-American.  May include several ethnic groups or focus on a single one.  Attention is paid to historical and social aspects of immigration and ethnicity.  Maximum 6 credits.  Offered as  ENGL 365E, ENGL 365EC, ENGL 465E, WLIT 365E and WLIT 465E. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 465N	Topics in African-American Literature	3 Units	Selected topics and writers from nineteenth, twentieth, and twenty-first century African-American literature.  May focus on a genre, a single author or a group of authors, a theme or themes.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as AFST 365N, ENGL 365N, ETHS 365N, WLIT 365N, ENGL 465N, and WLIT 465N. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 465Q	Post-Colonial Literature	3 Units	Readings in national and regional literatures from former European colonies such as Australia and African countries.  Maximum 6 credits.  Offered as ENGL 365Q, ENGL 365QC, ETHS 365Q, WLIT 365Q, ENGL 465Q, and WLIT 465Q. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 467	Introduction to Film	3 Units	An introduction to the art of film. Each week we'll take an element of film form (editing, cinematography, sound, and so on) and ask how filmmakers work with this element to produce effects. Most weeks we'll also screen a whole film and discuss it in light of the week's focus. Films screened will include masterworks of the silent era, foreign films, Hollywood studio-era classics, and more recent cinema. This course has no prerequisites and welcomes first year students. Offered as ENGL 367 and ENGL 467. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 468	Topics in Film	3 Units	Individual topics include Horror Films, Storytelling & Cinema, Science Fiction Films, Films of Alfred Hitchcock, American Cinema & Culture, History of Cinema, and many others. This course has no prerequisites and welcomes first year students. Other than the number of credits from one department a student can apply toward graduating, there is no limit to the number of times Topics in Film can be taken. A student who has previously taken ENGL 368C may receive credit for ENGL 368 only if the themes/topics are different. Offered as ENGL 368, ENGL 468, WLIT 368, and WLIT 468. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 469	Children's Literature	3 Units	Individual topics in 19th-, 20th-, and 21st-century children's literature.  Topics may focus on narrative and thematic developments in the genre, historical contexts, literary influences, or adaptations of children's literature into film and other media. Offered as ENGL 369 and ENGL 469. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 470	Comics and the Graphic Novel	3 Units	Selected topics in the study and analysis of comics and the graphic novel. Topics may include historical contexts of the genre, visual rhetoric, thematic developments, influence of literature, adaptations into film. A student may not receive credit for both ENGL 370 and ENGL 370C. Offered as ENGL 370, ENGL 370C, and ENGL 470.
ENGL 472	Studies in the Novel	3 Units	Selected topics in the history and formal development of the novel, such as detective novels; science fiction; epistolary novels; the rise of the novel; the stream of consciousness novel; the Bildungsroman in English.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 372 and ENGL 472. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 473	American Women's Poetry	3 Units	This course surveys American women's poetry from the seventeenth century to the present. We will read a range of poetry illustrating the roles of women poets in the development of the nation's literary, cultural, and social history. We will pay close attention to how women poets use traditional and innovative poetic forms to represent lived experiences and to engage the political realities of their varying historical moments Offered as ENGL 373, ENGL 473, and WGST 374. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 476	Studies in Genre	3 Units	Topics in literary genres, such as comedy, biography and autobiography, satire, allegory, the short story, the apologue, narrative poetry. May cross over the prose/poetry boundary. Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 376 and ENGL 476. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 485	Special Topics in Literature	3 Units	Close study of a theme or aspect of literature not covered by traditional generic or period rubrics, such as "spatial imagination," "semiotics of fashion in literature," "epistolarity." Maximum 9 credits. Offered as ENGL 385 and ENGL 485. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 486	Studies in Literature and Culture	3 Units	Boundary-crossing study of the relations between literary and other aspects of a particular culture or society, including theoretical and critical issues raised by such study. For example, literature and medicine, law and literature, gay and lesbian literature, Asian/Western literary relations, emotion in literature, philosophy and literature, literature and music. Maximum 9 credits. Offered as ENGL 386 and ENGL 486. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 487	Literary and Critical Theory	3 Units	A survey of major schools and texts of literary and critical theory. May be historically or thematically organized. Maximum 6 credits. Offered as ENGL 387, WLIT 387, ENGL 487, and WLIT 487. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 504	Creative Writing Theory and Practice	3 Units	This course is designed to prepare MA and PhD candidates in English to teach ENGL 203 (Introduction to Creative Writing). It is a required course for any graduate student seeking a concentration in creative writing. The course will operate as a hybrid seminar/workshop. Students will examine and discuss traditional creative writing and teaching practices while producing their own works of creative writing for exchange and critique. Recommended Preparation: a creative writing workshop at the undergraduate or graduate level or permission of the instructor.   While the overriding objective of this course is to prepare graduate students to teach ENGL 203, the multiple objectives coordinated toward that outcome are as follows: -	to exercise and refine creative writing practices of participants -	to share resources for professional development in creative writing (e.g. publication opportunities, conferences, etc.) --     to provide critical/historical view of creative writing's relationship with the academy -	to examine and debate received creative writing pedagogies -	to position creative writing pedagogy in resistance to hegemony and monoculture  -	to develop genre-specific, and genre-adaptable creative writing pedagogies -	to consider intersections of digital media and creative writing
ENGL 506	Professional Writing: Theory and Practice	3 Units	Prepares graduate students to teach disciplinary forms of writing, including technical and professional writing, in academic and non-academic settings. Prereq: ENGL 400.
ENGL 510	Research Methods	3 Units	This course focuses on methods and resources for research in English, including substantial treatments of narrative, poetics, and close-reading skills. It also introduces graduate students to questions of textuality, genre, medium, authorship, reception, historiography, and bibliography. Prereq: Graduate standing or permission of instructor.
ENGL 517	Seminar: American Literature	3 Units	Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 518	Seminar: English Literature 1660-1800	3 Units	Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 519	Seminar: English Literature 1800-1900	3 Units	Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 520	Seminar: 20th Century Literature	3 Units	Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 524	Seminar: Criticism and Other Special Topics	3 Units	Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 590	Special Reading or Research	3 Units	Independent study as arranged with individual instructors. Prereq: Graduate status or consent of department.
ENGL 601	Directed Reading	1 - 6 Units	Guided reading for academic and professional development. Prereq: Graduate status.
ENGL 651	Thesis M.A.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Graduate standing.
ENGL 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
ENTP 301	Entrepreneurial Strategy	3 Units	This course is designed to show students how to identify potential business opportunities, determine what constitutes a good business model, and to strategically implement a business proposal. Topics of focus include an overview of the entrepreneurial process, determinants of venture success in high tech and other business environments, and strategies for industry entry and venture growth. Prereq: At least Sophomore standing.
ENTP 302	Creativity in Design & Business: Sources of Perception, Imagination, & Creative Thinking	3 Units	The goal of this course is to develop skills and techniques for creative problem solving. The course is for anyone interested in design, the development of new products and services, and strategies for change in organizations and society. It is useful wherever we face challenging situations that require imagination, new ideas, and innovative approaches in a rapidly changing world. At its core, creativity is an issue of perception. Learning to change one's perception from what is known, comfortable, and familiar to what is unknown and potentially valuable and rewarding is the challenge of this course. We will explore a wide variety of methods, techniques, and tools for encouraging new perceptions. There will be useful readings, but also exercises and projects for individuals and teams to develop new strategies of creative thinking. Offered as DESN 302 and ENTP 302.
ENTP 308	Business Model Design and Innovation	3 Units	This course takes the perspective of entrepreneurs or business unit managers. The three basic questions that all entrepreneurs and intrepreneurs must answer is where to play, how to win and what to do.  You have identified a group of customers for your product or service (where to play).  Your first challenge is to know what features (Customer Attributes) your target customer will pay for. Innovative business models focus on a set of customer attributes that are usually very different from other industry incumbents that we call Focal Attributes. Your second challenge is to clearly state your profit logic -- how you will make money -- how to win.  The concept called Profit Objectives (similar but not the same as KPI and/or SMART objectives) allow you to operationalize the profit logic through specific and measurable deliverables.   Your third challenge is building the value chain that can deliver these focal attributes (what to do).  At this point, you have a good understanding of all the elements of your business model and in particular, how the focal attributes and the value chain align with the profit objectives. You will learn how to illustrate this alignment through a mapping process. Offered as DESN 308 and ENTP 308. Prereq: Junior standing or higher.
ENTP 310	Entrepreneurial Finance	3 Units	This course explores the financing and financial management of entrepreneurial new ventures. The course will focus on issues of financial management of new ventures (forecasting cash flows, cash flow management, valuation, capital structure) and the various financial methods and mechanisms available to entrepreneurs (bootstrapping, angel investors, venture capitalists, IPOs). Offered as ENTP 310 and ECON 312.
ENTP 311	Entrepreneurship and Wealth Creation	3 Units	This course explores all aspects of the creation of a new venture from idea through startup, growth, and beyond.  Students will learn how to evaluate opportunities, develop strategies, create a business plan and acquire financing for a new venture.  In this course students will develop a business plan for a new venture.
ENTP 428	Entrepreneurship and Innovation	3 Units	In all companies, new and old, large and small, innovation and entrepreneurship are important ways economic value is created.  Whether a person wants to found their own company or work in an existing one, and whether one wants to run a business or simply work in one, it is difficult to go through one's career without needing to engage in innovation or entrepreneurship.  The purpose of this course is to equip students to think about how to manage innovation and entrepreneurship.  The course will provide frameworks and tools for understanding four important dimensions of innovation and entrepreneurship: (1) Identifying and evaluating opportunities for the new products, processes, ways of organizing, materials, and markets; (2) assessing the needs of customers for new products and services and developing products and services that fulfill those needs; (3) creating strategies to financially benefit from investing in innovation and entrepreneurship; and (4) designing groups and organizations to be innovative and entrepreneurial.
ENTP 501	Special Problems and Topics	1 - 18 Units	
ESTD 101	Introduction to Environmental Thinking	3 Units	Critical comparison of scientific, historical, religious, and literary conceptions of nature. Theories of environmental ethics, legal, and economic conceptions of environmental goods. Current controversies concerning human population growth, energy use, the consumer society, and attitudes towards animals.
ESTD 202	Global Environmental Problems	3 Units	Global Environmental Problems is a course designed to provide students with an understanding of, and an appreciation for, human-influenced environmental changes that are global in scope.  Accordingly, much of the material will focus on the nature and structure of natural global systems, how and where in those systems human influences occur, and will delve deeply into a few particular problems and solutions of current interest, such as population growth, climate change, ozone depletion, and fisheries, from a variety of viewpoints. Offered as ESTD 202 and EEPS 202.
ESTD 303	Environmental Law	3 Units	Introduction to treatment of environmental issues in legal proceedings.  Sources of environmental law, legal procedure, common law remedies (toxic torts and human health, nuisance, contract law), statutes and regulations, endangered species, public lands, toxics regulation, nuclear power, coal.  The course employs the case method of reading and recitation of appellate judicial opinions.  We read both classic cases in environmental law as well as current controversies. Offered as ESTD 303 and EEPS 303.
ESTD 318	People and Planet	3 Units	In this course, we study the way in which the environment is a matter of politics.  Our approach is philosophical, examining the concept of politics in light of how societies shape their environment on Earth.  This elucidation's aim is practical.  We want to know not only what environmental politics is, but what we should do about it.  Students from any major are welcome, without prerequisite. Offered as PHIL 318, POSC 318 and ESTD 318.
ESTD 382	Art, Eco-criticism, and the Environment	3 Units	As issues of sustainability and environmental impact have become increasingly dominant concerns in contemporary society, eco-criticism has emerged as a vital methodological thread across the humanities.  Motivated by ethical as well as scholarly concerns, eco-criticism not only enacts a fundamental examination of nature as an ideological construct, but also seeks to investigate the complex interrelationship between humanity and the environment.  Concurrently, there has been a marked interest in studying the role of "green issues" in contemporary art, particularly in tracing the development of earth art or eco-art from the early 1970s to the present.  The goal of this seminar is to forge a link between these two emergent strands by tracing the complex relationship between art and the environment from the nineteenth-century to the present, seeking to thereby assess the capaciousness of eco-criticism as a methodological approach to art history. Offered as ARTH 382, ARTH 482 and ESTD 382. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ESTD 388	Politics, Policy, and the Global Environment	3 Units	This course examines the law, politics and policy surrounding global environmental challenges such as climate change.  The course aims to provide a broad overview of the key concepts, actors, debates, and issues in global environmental politics.  It aims to illustrate the complexities of addressing environmental problems-from the proliferation of global institutions and international actors, to the absence of central enforcement mechanisms.  We examine the causes of environmental degradation and competing views on the gravity of the problem.  Using concepts from political science and economics, we investigate the challenges in getting states to act jointly to address environmental problems.  We examine the actors and institutions of global environmental politics, to understand how conditions are defined as problems and responses are chosen and implemented.  The course concludes by applying the tools and concepts to the case of climate change. Offered as ESTD 388, POSC 388 and POSC 488.
ESTD 398	Seminar in Environmental Studies	3 Units	Small group discussion and student presentations concerning the cultural determinants of environmental attitudes and policies. Each student participates in all weekly discussions and leads at least one seminar. Prereq: ESTD 101 or  previous credit for ESTD 398.
ESTD 399	Departmental Seminar in Environmental Studies	3 Units	Discussion and critique of recent publications in Environmental Studies.  Students write weekly short essays on readings and participate in weekly group discussion.  Reading list changes annually and is typically comprised of 7-9 books that center on a few unifying themes for that year (food, energy, futures, toxic torts, attitudes toward animals, consumer culture, climate crises for example).  Students research, write, and defend a critical review of academic literature concerning some topic contained in the readings.  Prior enrollment in ESTD 101 is recommended but not required.  Students may not enroll in both ESTD 399 and ESTD 398 in the same year. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
ETHS 153	Introducing Chinese Religions	3 Units	This "topics" course offers an introduction to the academic study of Chinese religions. Whether approached through a particular theme or as a general historical introduction, each section of this course provides students with a general introduction to the academic study of religion and a basic religious literacy in the nuances and complexities in Chinese religions within various historical and socio-cultural contexts.  Section topics might include, but are not limited to:   Confucianism, Daoism, Chinese Buddhism, Gender and Sexuality in Chinese Religions.  Students may repeat the course for credit once (two times total for 6 credits), provided that the two sections are different. Offered as RLGN 153, ETHS 153 and CHIN 253. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 218	Jews in Early Modern Europe	3 Units	This course surveys the history of Jews in Europe and the wider world from the Spanish expulsion through the French Revolution.  Tracking peregrinations out of the Iberian Peninsula to the British Isles, France, Holland, Italy, Germany, Poland-Lithuania, the Ottoman Empire, and the American colonies, it examines the diverse ways Jews organized their communities, interacted with their non-Jewish neighbors, and negotiated their social, economic, and legal status within different states and empires.  What role did Jews play and what symbolic place did they occupy during a period of European expansion, technological innovation, artistic experimentation, and religious and political turmoil?  What internal and external dynamics affected Jewish experiences in the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries?  Through a selection of inquisitorial transcripts, government records, memoirs, and historical literature, we will explore topics such as persecution, conversion, messianism, toleration, emancipation, and assimilation. Offered as HSTY 218, JDST 218, and ETHS 218. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 228	Asian Americans: Histories, Cultures, Religions	3 Units	This course introduces students to Asian American Studies as an interdisciplinary academic discipline. It critically examines the global and transnational dimensions of U.S. history, the constructions of "modernity" in the U.S., and the shaping of U.S. culture and religion, race and racialization, identity constructions and contestations, law and law-making, colonialism and empire building, labor and migration, politics and public policy making, and social movements through a critical study of Asian Americans and their diverse histories, cultures, religions, identity negotiations and contestations, social movements, and political activism. Offered as ETHS 228, HSTY 228 and RLGN 228. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 243	Bollywood and Social Justice: Contemporary Bollywood Movies with a Social Message	3 Units	India, where over-the-top, melodramatic films dominate, produces more than 1,000 films a year. With lavish action sequences punctuated by periodic songs in picturesque locales, these films, popularly referred to as Bollywood, traditionally have been known for depicting imaginary worlds, very far from reality. Among these are movies that are deeply immersed in issues of religion, religious conflict, caste, and social injustice. These issues range from ones concerning purity and the class system and Hindu-Muslim conflict, to women's rights and human trafficking. This class will be looking at a number of Bollywood films with focal points of matters pertaining to social justice. Students will learn about the foundations of these inequalities and intolerances so that they can more completely understand the themes addressed in the movies. The class will thus focus on the religion(s) of cultures outside the United States. It will address in a substantive way ethnic, gender, sexual, religious, or other cultural practices outside the United States, so as to provide students with fresh perspectives on their own cultural assumptions, traditions, and experiences. Offered as ETHS 243 and RLGN 243. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 251	Perspectives in Ethnicity, Race, Religion and Gender	3 Units	This course is designed to introduce students to the study of ethnicity.  Basic concepts such as race, gender, class, and identity construction will be examined.  Students are encouraged to use the tools and perspectives of several disciplines to address the experiences of ethnic groups in the United States. Offered as ETHS 251 and RLGN 251. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 251A	Oral Performances and Ethnic Identities	3 Units	This course is an in-depth study of  performances that have helped to shape and anchor the identities of different non-Western ethnic groups.  The course will explore the multi-generic composition of the oral epic, which combines forms as diverse as narrative, song, praise poetry, theater, music and historical oratory.  ETHS 251A will provide a comprehensive overview of oral performances while focusing on a particular area or areas of Africa, Asia, the United States, or Latin America.  In the African continent, for example, the focus will be on the Madinka Sundjata corpus, dealing with the empire of Mali; the life of Shaka, the Zulu in South Africa; while in the United States, the narrative life of Frederick Douglas, blues and negro-spiritual will be considered as the sites of ethnic discourse.  Using a comparative approach, the course will examine aesthetic issues of oral performance, the written word, interactions between music and voice, and interaction between poetic and prose narrative forms.  The performance texts will be augmented by field recordings and in-class demonstrations by griots and other storytellers from Africa and the United States.
ETHS 252A	Introduction to African-American Studies	3 Units	This course is designed to introduce students to the study of Black History, cultures, economics, and politics.  Students will learn about the development of the field by exploring theoretical questions, methodological approaches, and major themes that have shaped the study of black people, primarily in the U.S. context.  This is a seminar-style, discussion-based course that emphasizes critical analysis and expository writing. Offered as ETHS 252A and HSTY 252A. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 252B	Introduction to Latina/o Studies	3 Units	Interdisciplinary introduction to the basis for a Latina/o ethnicity through an exploration of commonalities and differences in the peoples of Latin American and Caribbean origin within the continental United States. Topics include methodological and theoretical formulations central to the field (e.g., racial, gender, and sexual formations, modes and relations of production and class, nation and transnation), history and contemporary issues of identity, family, community, immigration, and the potential for a pan-ethnic identity. Discussions will focus on major demographic, social, economic and political trends: historical roots of Latinas/os in the U.S.; the evolution of Latina/o ethnicity and identity; immigration and the formation of Latina/o communities; schooling and language usage; tendencies and determinants of socioeconomic and labor force status; discrimination, segregation and bias in contemporary America; racial and gender relations; and political behavior among Latinas/os.   Offered as: ETHS 252B and HSTY 259. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 253A	Introduction to Modern African History	3 Units	A general introduction to major themes in modern African history, with an emphasis on the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.  Topics include oral tradition and narrative, economic structure and dynamics, religious movements, colonialism, nationalism, and the dilemmas of independent African states. Offered as AFST 135, ETHS 253A and HSTY 135. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 253B	Introduction to Latin American History	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to the historical and cultural development of Latin America, in an attempt to identify the forces, both internal and external, which shape the social, economic and political realities in present day Latin America.  Beginning with its pre-Columbian civilizations, the course moves through the conquest and colonial period of the Americas, the wars of independence and the emergence of nation-states in the nineteenth century, and the issues confronting the region throughout the turbulent twentieth century, such as migration and urbanization, popular protest and revolution, environmental degradation, great power intervention, the drug trade and corruption, and the integration of the region into the global economy. Offered as ETHS 253B and HSTY 136. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 253C	Religion and Philosophy in China	3 Units	This course critically examines the three principal religious and philosophical traditions of China: the Confucian, Daoist, and Chinese Buddhist traditions. Through a combination of assigned print and online readings, video clips and documentaries, class discussions, and written assignments, students explore the origins and historical developments, principal thinkers, central religious and doctrinal themes, ethics, spirituality, popular devotions, social movements, and contemporary developments of these three major religious and philosophical traditions of China. Students will consider the wider social, cultural, ethical, economic, and political dimensions of Chinese religions and philosophies generally, and themes of community and society, identity constructions, personal experiences, movements, as well as their socio-cultural reproductions in contemporary China, and where appropriate, the Chinese Diaspora in North America. Offered as CHIN 253C, ETHS 253C, PHIL 253 and RLGN 253. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 254	The Holocaust	3 Units	This class seeks to answer fundamental questions about the Holocaust: the German-led organized mass murder of nearly six million Jews and millions of other ethnic and religious minorities.  It will investigate the origins and development of racism in modern European society, the manifestations of that racism, and responses to persecution.  An additional focus of the course will be comparisons between different groups, different countries, and different phases during the Nazi era. Offered as HSTY 254, RLGN 254, ETHS 254, and JDST 254. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 255	Global Judaism: Diversity Across the Jewish World	3 Units	Scattered across the globe over the course of millennia, Jews' diverse histories and environments have given rise to a great range of religious, cultural and social forms. Using ethnographies as our primary texts, we will think critically and comparatively about Judaism and Jewishness in the Americas, Europe, Africa, and Asia.  Along our journey, we examine how Jews have navigated their experiences as minorities in their many diaspora homelands, and how they have they adapted their cultural and religious practices to the various environments in which they have found themselves.  In addition to exploring their Jewishness vis-à-vis others, we also examine questions of exclusion and belonging that Jews have faced as they have encountered each another in recent decades through tourism, mass migration, globalization, and the internet. How do the world's varied Jewish groups - who are of different skin colors, who speak different languages, and who carry different historical memories - navigate ethnic divides, race relations, and religious diversity? Should we speak of a single Jewish religion and Jewish people at all? Offered as ANTH 255, ETHS 255, JDST 255 and RLGN 255. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 258	History of Southern Africa	3 Units	A survey of southern Africa from about 1600. Topics include the social structure of pre-colonial African societies, the beginnings of European settlement, the rise of Shaka, the discovery of minerals and the development of industry, Zimbabwe's guerrilla war and independence, and the rise and apparent demise of apartheid. Offered as AFST 258, ETHS 258 and HSTY 258. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 260	U.S. Slavery and Emancipation	3 Units	Begins with the African encounter with Europeans during the emergence of the modern slave trade. Students are introduced to the documents and secondary literature on the creation and maintenance of slavery, first in colonial America, and then in the United States. The course concludes with the destruction of slavery. Offered as AFST 260, ETHS 260 and HSTY 260. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 261	African-American History 1865-1945	3 Units	Explores the fashioning of a modern African-American culture between emancipation and the end of World War II. Emergence of a northern-based leadership, the challenge of segregation, emergence of bourgeois culture, the fashioning of racial consciousness and black nationalism, the shift from a primarily southern and rural population to one increasingly northern and urban, the creation and contours of a modern African-American culture, the construction of racial/gender and racial/class consciousness. Offered as AFST 261, ETHS 261 and HSTY 261. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 262	African-American History Since 1945	3 Units	Completes the three-term sequence of the African-American history survey (although the first two courses are not prerequisites for this course). Explores some of the key events and developments shaping African-American social, political, and cultural history since 1945. Offered as AFST 262, ETHS 262 and HSTY 262. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 280	History of Modern Mexico	3 Units	This course explores the major issues that have influenced the formation of modern Mexico.  This class is organized around three major themes.  First, we will examine Mexican identity formation and its political implications. Second, we will assess Mexican life in relation to the development of the Mexican economy.  Finally, we will survey how elite and popular forms of violence have affected Mexican society.  Throughout the course, we will discuss the significance of the colonial heritage, regional distinctions, racial and gender stratification, and the creation and reconfiguration of various types of borders. Offered as HSTY 280 and ETHS 280. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 295	The Francophone World	3 Units	The course offers an introduction to the Francophone World from a historical, cultural, and literary perspective. The Francophone World includes countries and regions around the globe with a substantial French-speaking population (and where French is sometimes, but not always, an official language): North America (Louisiana, Quebec, and Acadia); North Africa (Tunisia, Morocco, Algeria, and Egypt); the Middle-East (Lebanon, Syria); the Caribbean (Martinique, Guadeloupe, Haiti); Southeast Asia (Vietnam); and Europe (France, Belgium, Switzerland, and Luxembourg). FRCH 295 provides a comprehensive overview of the Francophone World, while focusing on a particular area or areas in any given semester. Offered as AFST 295, ETHS 295, FRCH 295, and WLIT 295. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 302	The Lemonade Class: Religion, Race, Sex and Black Music	3 Units	Charles Long suggests that black musical forms are creative responses to the particular circumstances of black peoples' presence in the U.S and black notions of the sacred. In April of 2016, Beyoncé released her visual album Lemonade two days after the death of Prince. This course is organized around the album's title cuts and links these two artists together in an examination of religion and musical performance as creative response to the racial and gendered conditions of black life. The course investigates how both artists have used music as a platform to explore issues of race, gender, commerce, sexuality, power and divinity. The course also looks at examples from the works of earlier artists who address similar themes such as Ma Rainey, Bessie Smith, Muddy Waters, Billie Holiday, Nina Simone, Little Richard, James Brown, Marvin Gaye, and Aretha Franklin. Offered as AFST 302, ETHS 302, MUHI 316, RLGN 302, RLGN 402, and WGST 302. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 306	The Cuban Experience: an immersion in its culture and society	3 Units	This is a three-week study-abroad intensive course that takes place in Matanzas and Havana, Cuba. The course combines the unique advantages of a total immersion environment in the Cuban culture with a classroom curriculum that includes the study of relevant cultural, literary and historical issues. Students complete three hours of classroom instruction and an hour and a half of workshop four days per week. Also, they participate in organized visits to historic sites and museums connected to the culture curriculum. The focus of the culture curriculum is the study of Cuban history and culture through its literature, visual arts, films, and music. After applying and being accepted into the program, students meet for personal advising with the program director and attend four different one-hour orientation-information meetings in the spring semester. After successful completion of the study-abroad program, students receive three upper-level credits in Spanish or Ethnic Studies. The course is interdisciplinary in its approach and provides students with the tools they need to analyze and understand the complexities of modern Cuba.  Students will have formal classes taught by their professor and talks, and meetings with specialists on Cuban literature, art, architecture, history and other aspects of culture and society. Also, they will attend lectures, participate in discussions, and take field trips that will expose them to many aspects of Cuban culture, such as art, architecture, music, dance, film, literature, artisan work, folklore, history and urban growth. Offered as SPAN 306, SPAN 406, and ETHS 306. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: SPAN 202.
ETHS 308	Immigration and the Paris Experience	3 Units	Three-week immersion learning experience living and studying in Paris. The focus of the course is the culture, literature, and the arts of the African, Arab, and Asian communities of Paris. At least half of the course looks at issues surrounding immigration that affect women in particular. Students spend a minimum of fifteen hours per week visiting cultural centers and museums and interviewing authors and students about the immigrant experience. Assigned readings complement course activities. Students enrolled in FRCH 308/408 do coursework in French. WLIT 308/408, ETHS 308, and WGST 308 students have the option of completing coursework in English. Graduate students have additional course requirements. Offered as FRCH 308, WLIT 308, ETHS 308, WGST 308, FRCH 408, and WLIT 408. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 314	Cultures of the United States	3 Units	This course considers the rich ethnic diversity of the U.S. from the perspective of social/cultural anthropology. Conquest, immigration, problems of conflicts and accommodation, and the character of the diverse regional and ethnic cultures are considered as are forms of racism, discrimination, and their consequences. Groups of interest include various Latina/o and Native peoples, African-American groups, and specific ethnic groups of Pacific, Mediterranean, European, Asian, and Caribbean origin. Offered as ANTH 314, ETHS 314, and ANTH 414.
ETHS 318	History of Black Women in the U.S.	3 Units	Chronologically arranged around specific issues in black women's history organizations, participation in community and political movements, labor experiences, and expressive culture. The course will use a variety of materials, including autobiography, literature, music, and film. Offered as AFST 318, ETHS 318, HSTY 318, and WGST 318.
ETHS 326	Christianity in China	3 Units	This course critically evaluates Christianity's long history in China, beginning with the "Luminous Religion" (Jingjiao) that was propagated by Assyrian Christian missionaries in Tang China (7th century CE), the missionary endeavors of Catholic and Protestant foreign missionaries and mission societies, the rise of indigenous Chinese Christianities that sought independence from foreign missionaries, the impact of communist rule and the Cultural Revolution, and current developments involving both the official government-approved churches (i.e., the Three Self Patriotic Movement and the Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association) on the one hand, and the house church movement (jiating jiaohui) on the other hand. Students will critically discuss and analyze the historical dimensions of Christianity's presence in China and engagement with various social, cultural, political, philosophical, and religious aspects of Chinese society, past and present, and consider the implications of emergent forms of contemporary indigenous Chinese Christian movements for the future of Chinese Christianity. Offered as RLGN 316, RLGN 416, HSTY 322, CHIN 316 and ETHS 326. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 333	Contemporary Caribbean Literature	3 Units	In addition to developing a general familiarity with the literature and history of this region, students will acquire an awareness of the interrelation of national identity, memory, and language in the texts produced by contemporary Caribbean authors, and of the cultural hybridity characteristic of this production. The themes treated by these authors include colonialism and postcolonialism, cultural and religious syncretism, and sexual politics. Offered as SPAN 333, SPAN 433, and ETHS 333. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 337	Women in the Arab World	3 Units	The purpose of this course is twofold: It is a course that allows students an in-depth look at the diverse women who represent a number of cultures in the Arab world in nations from the Mashrek to the Maghreb. The second primary goal of the course is to study such women through the eyes of leading Arab women theorists who have made an impact not only in their own countries, but also on disciplines intersecting with women's studies worldwide. We will study the Arab woman's place in her respective society, in political and economic systems, in education, and in the family. We will also analyze her contributions to art and literature as well as to the sciences. The course will provide an overview of the Arab woman throughout history, from her origins to her place within recent movements within the Arab Spring and other current world events. As Arab women are Muslim, Christian, and Jewish, views of women within these major world religions will also be taken into account as we study the Arab woman as well as religion's impact on culture in the Middle East and in the Maghreb in particular. In the course, we will utilize theoretical texts, but also case studies as well as examples from media and the arts. During the semester, we will take advantage of teleconferencing opportunities between CWRU and two major academic units for Women's Studies in the Arab world: The Institute for Women's Studies in the Arab World (IWSAW) in Beirut, Lebanon, and the University of Jordan's Center for Women's Studies in Amman. Offered as FRCH 337, FRCH 437, ARAB 337, ETHS 337 and WGST 337. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 342	Latin American Feminist Voices	3 Units	Examination of the awakening of feminine and feminist consciousness in the literary production of Latin American women writers, particularly from the 1920s to the present.  Close attention paid to the dominant themes of love and dependency; imagination as evasion; alienation and rebellion; sexuality and power; the search for identity and the self-preservation of subjectivity.  Readings include prose, poetry, and dramatic texts of female Latin American writers contributing to the emerging of feminist ideologies and the mapping of feminist identities. Offered as SPAN 342, SPAN 442, ETHS 342, and WGST 342. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 343	The New Drama in Latin American	3 Units	Representative works of contemporary Latin American drama. Critical examination of selected dramatic works of twentieth-century Latin America provides students insight into the nature of drama and into the structural and stylistic strategies utilized by Latin American dramatists to create the "new theater," one which is closely related to Latin American political history. Offered as SPAN 343, SPAN 443 and ETHS 343. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 349	The Arab World Experience	3 Units	Taught and led by Case faculty, The Arab World Experience is a spring semester course with a spring break study abroad component in a Middle Eastern or North African country supplemented by course meetings before and after travel. It will rotate among countries such as Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, etc. and be taught by faculty with appropriate area expertise in Arabic, Women's and Gender Studies, and/or Ethnic Studies. The course focuses on topics such as history, politics, culture, and gender relations within the society of study. Workload and learning outcomes are commensurate with a semester-long three credit hour course. Guest lectures in the host country are an important component of the course as they bring a fresh, authentic perspective to the aforementioned topics discussed. There will be three three-hour meetings prior to travel, required reading, and one three-hour meeting after travel. In the host country, students will spend seven days (five-eight hours per day) in seminars, discussions, and site visits. Student grades are determined on the basis of participation, attendance, a daily experiential learning journal, interviews with guest speakers, and a final exam. Offered as ARAB 349, ETHS 349 and WGST 349. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 352	African Feminisms	3 Units	This course traces the history of African feminism from its origins within traditions through to a more contemporary theoretical analysis of gender, marriage, and motherhood seen from a Afrocentric perspective.  Approaches studied are those that pertain to anthropology, history, literature, sociology, and culture. African feminist theory of scholars such as Filomina Steady, Cheikh Anta Diop, Buchi Emecheta, Ifi Amadiume, Obioma Nnameka, Oyeronko Oyewumi, and Calixthe Beyala will be studied and there will be some comparative analysis of Western theories to show how African feminisms are clearly distinct. Theories on these feminisms will be presented, and in the process, students will look at cases of women in Cameroon, Nigeria, Ghana, Kenya, and Senegal.  It is commonly believed that African women were defined for a long time according to constructs of Western anthropology.  This course will thus look at social institutions such as woman-to-woman marriage, matriarchy, and various women's rituals in order to identify African constructs of gender, family, kinship, marriage, and motherhood. Offered as ETHS 352 and WGST 352. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 353	Hindu and Jain Bioethics: Special Focus on Women's and Gender Studies	3 Units	This course will provide both an introduction to basic Hinduism and Jainism and an introduction to Hindu and Jain bioethics. We will focus primarily on bioethical issues that pertain to women and that are gender related. These issues include abortion, menstruation, surrogacy, intersex, and other topics of controversy.  Offered as ETHS 353, RLGN 353, RLGN 453, and WGST 355. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 356	Afro-Hispanic Literature	3 Units	This course will survey the literary and cultural production of writers and artists of African descent in Latin America and the Caribbean, paying attention to both their creative and theoretical texts.  Discussion of questions of race and ethnicity will allow students to explore the ways in which these texts reformulate the idea of national identity and cultural belonging in the context of the nation-state, whose traditional centrality is being weakened through the effects of migration and exile.  Readings include works by writers from Cuba, Puerto Rico, Dominican Republic, Costa Rica, Colombia, Panama, Ecuador, and Peru. Offered as SPAN 356, SPAN 456 and ETHS 356. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 358	Latin American Cinema	3 Units	This course is designed to introduce students to the basic tools of film analysis as well as to the major trends and movements in Latin American cinema from the 1960s to the present.  Through the analysis of representative films from Latin America, the course will examine the development of a variety of cinematic styles, paying particular attention to the historical contexts in which the films were produced and to the political, cultural, and aesthetic debates that surrounded their production. Offered as SPAN 358, SPAN 458 and ETHS 358. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 364	Dictatorship and Democracy in Modern Latin America	3 Units	Examination of political leadership in 20th-century Latin America, exploring the nature, causes, and consequences of dictatorship and democracy in the region, moving from the collapse of oligarchic rule and the emergence of populism in the 1930s and 1940s, to the end of democracy and establishment of military regimes in the 1960s and 1970s, and ultimately to the contemporary processes of democratization and economic liberalization. Offered as ETHS 364, POSC 364, and POSC 464. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 365N	Topics in African-American Literature	3 Units	Selected topics and writers from nineteenth, twentieth, and twenty-first century African-American literature.  May focus on a genre, a single author or a group of authors, a theme or themes.  Maximum 6 credits. Offered as AFST 365N, ENGL 365N, ETHS 365N, WLIT 365N, ENGL 465N, and WLIT 465N. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ETHS 365Q	Post-Colonial Literature	3 Units	Readings in national and regional literatures from former European colonies such as Australia and African countries.  Maximum 6 credits.  Offered as ENGL 365Q, ENGL 365QC, ETHS 365Q, WLIT 365Q, ENGL 465Q, and WLIT 465Q. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
ETHS 369	Social Justice Issues in Latin America	3 Units	This course explores ethnicity, gender, and religion in Latin American politics and society, and then tackles revolution, democracy, and populism. Throughout, the region's history, geography, and culture are taken into account--for example, the European and indigenous legacies in Mexico and Perú, Bolivia, Chile, and Ecuador;  the Asian presence in Perú and Brazil; the African contributions to Cuba and Brazil; female heads of state, such as Nicaragua's Violeta Chamorro, Chile's Michelle Bachelet, Argentina's Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, Costa Rica's Laura Chinchilla, and Brazil's Dilma Rousseff.  Liberation Theology and the current Pope's worries about the declining number of Catholics in the region are also addressed. Today's multiparty democracy in Mexico, Hugo Chávez's legacy in Venezuela, and Cuba's international humanitarian aid and ideological aims would not be possible without revolution(s) and populism. They are inevitably intertwined with ethnicity, gender, and religion.  This course aims to encourage a better understanding of Latin America and its relation to the rest of the world. Offered as ETHS 369, POSC 369 and POSC 469. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 374	Politics of Development in the Global South	3 Units	Exploration of the post-World War II emergence of the Global South nations of Africa, Asia, the Middle East, Latin America, and the Eastern Europe arena. Offered as ETHS 374, POSC 374, and POSC 474.
ETHS 385	Hispanic Literature in Translation	3 Units	Critical analysis and appreciation of representative literary masterpieces from Spain and Latin America, and by Hispanics living in the U.S. Texts cover a variety of genres and a range of literary periods, from works by Cervantes to those of Gabriel Garcia Marquez. The course will examine the relationship between literature and other forms of artistic production, as well as the development of the Hispanic literary text within the context of historical events and cultural production of the period. Counts toward Spanish major only as related course. No knowledge of Spanish required. Offered as ETHS 385, ETHS 485,  SPAN 385,  SPAN 485,  WLIT 385, and WLIT 485. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 391	Advanced Readings in Black History	3 Units	This is an advanced readings course that may change from semester to semester.  This course will provide students with an opportunity to more deeply explore special themes and theoretical issues in the field of black history that are often quickly and briefly covered in broad survey courses.  Readings may be organized around specific topics such as resistance and social protest, black intellectual history, black nationalism and identity, black film and historical literacy black cultural forms and politics, black urban history, or some such other combination.  Students may take this course more than once and receive credit as long as the course topic differs.  Students should contact the History Department for more details on course content during any given semester.   Offered as AFST 399, ETHS 391, HSTY 399 and HSTY 499.
ETHS 393	Advanced Readings in the History of Race	3 Units	This course examines the concept of race as a social construction that carries political and economic implications.  We begin by examining the histories of the early racial taxonomists (e.g., Bernier, Linnaeus, and Blumenbach among others) and the contexts that informed their writings.  We then assess how the concept of race changed from the nineteenth to the twentieth century in the United States.  We conclude by evaluating how the ideology of race has influenced U.S. domestic life and foreign policy at specific historical moments. Offered as AFST 393, HSTY 393, HSTY 493, and ETHS 393. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ETHS 485	Hispanic Literature in Translation	3 Units	Critical analysis and appreciation of representative literary masterpieces from Spain and Latin America, and by Hispanics living in the U.S. Texts cover a variety of genres and a range of literary periods, from works by Cervantes to those of Gabriel Garcia Marquez. The course will examine the relationship between literature and other forms of artistic production, as well as the development of the Hispanic literary text within the context of historical events and cultural production of the period. Counts toward Spanish major only as related course. No knowledge of Spanish required. Offered as ETHS 385, ETHS 485,  SPAN 385,  SPAN 485,  WLIT 385, and WLIT 485. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
EXAM 600	Master's Comprehensive Exam	1 Unit	Master's Comprehensive Exam.
EXAM 700	PhD General/Qualifier Exam	1 Unit	Doctoral Comprehensive Exam.
ANES 403	Cardiac Electrophysiology I	1 Unit	In this course students will learn basic and advanced Electrocardiogram interpretation using simulators and electrocardiograms to understand an overview of heart anatomy, function, and neurophysiology.
ANES 404	Cardiac Electrophysiology II	1 Unit	Continuation of ANES 403. Prereq: ANES 403.
ANES 440	Patient Monitoring and Instrumentation I	2 Units	Students are taught the proper balance between circuits and engineering concepts and the clinical application of anesthesia instrumentation. Monitors and devices used in the operating room are studied with respect to principles of operation, calibration, and interpretation of data. A hands-on laboratory is utilized to maximize direct contact to the instrumentation of the profession.
ANES 441	Patient Monitoring and Instrumentation II	2 Units	Continuation of ANES 440. Recommended preparation: ANES 440.
ANES 456	Applied Physiology for Anesthesiologist Assistants I	3 Units	Basic and applied human systems physiology with emphasis on topics and areas of special concern to the anesthetist.
ANES 458	Applied Physiology for Anesthesiologist Assistants II	3 Units	Continuation of ANES 456. Recommended preparation: ANES 403 and ANES 456.
ANES 460	Introduction to Anesthesia	2 Units	Introduction to basic concepts dealing with clinical anesthesia.  Medical terminology, human anatomy, medical chart interpretation and drug dosage calculations.
ANES 461	Orientation to Clinical Experience	3 Units	Introduction to experience in the operating room with emphasis on the fundamental procedures and techniques used in administering an anesthetic. Preoperative assessment, IV placement techniques, airway management, intraoperative patient care and postoperative management are all emphasized in this course.  BLS (basic life support) certification is required for course completion. Recommended preparation: Acceptance in the M.S.A. program.
ANES 462	Anesthesia Clinical Correlation I	1 Unit	A series of conferences presented by students that applies to anesthetic theory as it relates to the clinical experience. Specific anesthetic situations are emphasized. Recommended preparation: ANES 460.
ANES 463	Anesthesia Clinical Experience I	3 Units	A continuation of the preparation, observation, and hands-on learning format initiated in ANES 461. Patient management and technical skills are refined with close attention to the didactic course work. A comprehensive clinical examination is administered at the end of the semester. ACLS (Advanced Cardiac Life Support) certification is required for course completion. Recommended preparation: ANES 461.
ANES 464	Anesthesia Clinical Correlation II	1 Unit	A spectrum of case presentation conferences presented by the students dealing with basic and major problems in anesthesia management. Medical and surgical history of individual patients and the outcomes of anesthesia and surgery are emphasized. Journal Club and Morbidity and Mortality conferences are included. Recommended preparation: ANES 462.
ANES 465	Anesthesia Clinical Experience II	4 Units	A continuation of ANES 463. A comprehensive clinical examination is administered at the end of the semester. PALS (Pediatric Advanced Life Support) and ACLS (Advanced Cardiac Life Support) certification is required for course completion. Recommended preparation: ANES 463, BLS Certification, ACLS Certification.
ANES 467	Anesthesia Clinical Experience III	4 Units	Extended exposure to all of the clinical subspecialties of anesthesiology (obstetrics, pediatrics, neurosurgery, cardiovascular, etc.). Students alternate through rotations at several area hospitals. Recommended preparation: ANES 465, ACLS certification and PALS.
ANES 468	Anesthesia Clinical Correlation III	1 Unit	The second-year equivalent of ANES 462. Recommended preparation: ANES 464.
ANES 469	Anesthesia Clinical Experience IV	1 - 10 Units	A continuation of ANES 467. A comprehensive clinical examination is administered at the end of the semester. Recommended preparation: ANES 467.
ANES 470	Anesthesia Clinical Correlation IV	1 Unit	The second-year equivalent of ANES 464. Recommended preparation: ANES 468.
ANES 471	Anesthesia Clinical Experience V	1 - 10 Units	A continuation of ANES 469. A comprehensive clinical examination is administered at the end of the semester. Recommended preparation: ANES 469.
ANES 475	Pharmacology for Anesthesiologist Assistants I	3 Units	Pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, uptake, distribution and action of the volatile and intravenous anesthetics, muscle relaxants, narcotics, hypnotics and other pharmaceuticals used in the administration of an anesthetic.  Prereq: Consent of Department.
ANES 476	Pharmacology for Anesthesiologist Assistants II	3 Units	Continuation of ANES 475. Prereq: ANES 475.
ANES 477	Clinical Decision Making in Anesthesia	3 Units	An introduction to thinking about clinical situations and problems and coming to safe and effective solutions to these problems. This course focuses on common clinical situations where appropriate decision making is important to the outcome of the case. Numerous areas of medicine and anesthesiology will be covered to provide the student with a wide sampling of decisions made each day with patient care. This course supplements the other courses offered during the spring semester by integrating and applying basic science knowledge to the care of patients.  Prereq: Consent of department.
ANES 478	Clinical Decision Making in Anesthesia II	3 Units	Guided and targeted discussion on common anesthetic considerations relegated by co-existing disease, comorbidity, anatomy, surgical procedures and common practice. Prereq: ANES 477.
ANES 480	Fundamentals of Anesthetic Sciences I	1 Unit	A continuum of courses over the fall and spring semesters that covers a series of topics in basic medical science with special emphasis on the effect of anesthetics on normal physiology.  An examination is administered at the end of each semester.
ANES 481	Fundamentals of Anesthetic Sciences II	1 Unit	A series of topics in basic medical science with special emphasis on the effect of anesthetics on normal physiology.  An examination is administered at the end of the semester. Prereq: ANES 480.
ANES 485	Introduction to Physiological Model-Based Simulation	1 Unit	Introduction to physiological model-based simulation using on-screen computer simulation and mannequins. Emphasis is placed on improving appropriate anesthesia-related basic science knowledge, manual skills in anesthesia machine checkout, drug and equipment setup, safety inspections, and performing anesthesia for uncomplicated surgical cases.
ANES 486	Physiological Model-Based Simulation I	1 Unit	An extension of ANES 485 with emphasis on improving or exercising knowledge of anesthesia-appropriate basic science, the use of more advanced equipment and techniques for uncomplicated surgical cases with an introduction to crisis management. Recommended preparation: ANES 485.
ANES 487	Physiological Model-Based Simulation II	1 Unit	An extension of ANES 486 emphasizing the physical techniques aspects of crisis management, team work and rescue in anesthesia, including support for and review of training in Basic Life Support and Advanced Cardiac Life Support. Recommended preparation: ANES 486.
ANES 488	Anesthesia Non-Technical Skills Lab	1 Unit	In this course the student will learn anesthesia non-technical skills, which are used integrally with medical knowledge and clinical techniques.  They encompass both interpersonal skills (e.g. communication, team working, leadership) and cognitive skills (e.g. situation awareness, decision making).  This course uses modified Crew Resource Management techniques taught in the aviation industry and considers the limitations of human performance and the nature of human error.  The goals are to train individuals to avoid, capture and mitigate against the consequences of error.  During the course, behaviors shown to minimize errors and maximize patient safety are highlighted and then practiced, with feedback being given to students on their performance.
ANES 490	Ethics, Law and Diversity for Anesthesiologist Assistants	2 Units	This course will focus on three topics.  First, a discussion of legal practice as it applies to health care including basics of medical jurisprudence, negligence, and how to avoid a lawsuit.  Second, a discussion of ethical theory including the principles of medical ethics, do not resuscitate, truth telling, and assessment of competence.  Last, a discussion on diversity that will focus on the differences and similarities among people and how these factors influence patient care.  The final grade will be based on an essay and a multiple choice exam.
ANES 499	Clinical Remediation	1 - 10 Units	(Credit as arranged.)  Course offered to the student one time during the program of study which remediates "C" or below work in a clinical course.
ANES 580	Principles of Anesthesia Safety and Science Review I	1 Unit	A continuum of online courses over the fall and spring semesters that covers a series of topics in basic medical science with special emphasis in the specialty of anesthesia. Using well-defined virtual platform, the course combines high-quality realistic practice questions, cognitive research, and individualized student testing behaviors to guide learning and increase performance on high stake medical exams. Regularly scheduled examinations throughout the semester are administered.
ANES 581	Principles of Anesthesia Safety and Science Review II	1 Unit	A continuum of online courses over the fall and spring semesters that covers a series of topics in basic medical science with special emphasis in the specialty of anesthesia.   Using a well-defined virtual platform, the course combines high-quality realistic practice questions, cognitive research, and individualized student testing behaviors to guide learning and increase performance on high stake medical exams. Regularly scheduled examinations throughout the semester are administered. Prereq or Coreq: ANES 580.
ANES 584	Physiological Model-Based Simulation III	1 Unit	An extension of ANES 487 emphasizing the physical techniques and aspects of crisis management, team work, and rescue in anesthesia. Prereq: ANES 487.
ANES 585	Physiological Model-Based Simulation IV	1 Unit	Extension of ANES 584 emphasizing the physical techniques and aspects of crisis management, team work, and rescue in anesthesia. Prereq: ANES 584.
ANES 599	Clinical Remediation	1 - 10 Units	(Credit as arranged.)  Course offered to the student one time during the program of study which remediates "C" or below work in a clinical course.
EDMP 611	Theory and Practice of Collective Action	3 Units	The ability of autonomous and interdependent parties to coordinate actions, or to act cooperatively, affects a wide range of organizational and social problems. This course addresses the theory and practice of collective action in local, national and global contexts.  Case studies of collective action problems, such as environmental protection, community revitalization, and the mobilization of interest groups will be discussed. Offered as DBAP 611 and EDMP 611. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the DM Program.
EDMP 613	Leading Change	3 Units	Change is an enigma and yet sustained, desirable change (SDC) drives adaptation, growth and life itself.  In this course, we will continuously attempt to answer two questions: What is the process of sustained, desirable change?  and What is the role of a leader?  Concepts from complexity theory will be used, including understanding the multilevel nature of SDC at the individual, dyad,  team, organization, community, country, and global levels.  Intentional Change Theory (ICT) will be used as the organizing concept for the changes studied.  Leadership and its development will be examined by studying a number of topics and applying them to three major case studies: (1) yourself; (2) practice coaching with compassion; and (3) a major change project.  This course will explore questions, such as: Who are effective leaders?  How do they think and act?  What makes us want to follow them?  How are leaders developed?  What is the role of emotional and social intelligence?  How does a leader's mind, body, heart, and spirit affect their performance? Offered as DBAP 613 and EDMP 613. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the DM Program.
EDMP 614	Business as an Evolving Complex System	3 Units	The goal of this course is to provide a foundation for understanding how business systems evolve, why the business systems in the major advanced countries have evolved differently over the last 100 years or so, and what the underlying driving forces are.  The focus is on transformation rather than economic growth.  The course examines the evolution of business systems as a result of technological and organizational change.  It deals with the role of history, culture and finance in generating business organizations in various countries.  The course also studies the emergence of regional innovation systems and industry clusters, as well as how digitization and globalization are changing the "industrial logic." Offered as DBAP 614 and EDMP 614. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the DM Program.
EDMP 616	Global Economic Systems and Issues	3 Units	This course provides a framework and analytical tools for understanding globalization and international economic relations in the context of the global political system.  It analyzes the economic and political forces that are shaping global cooperation on economic matters, the role and impact of international economic institutions such as the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Trade Organization, and evolving forms of regional governance, such as the European Union.  It covers national and international policies and development and the causes and cures of international financial crises.  The course revolves around concepts of efficiency, equality, power, and institutions in the making of public policy towards globalization of communications and transportation. Offered as DBAP 616 and EDMP 616. Prereq: EDMP 665.
EDMP 617	Technology and Social System Design	3 Units	Managers are designers who shape the social and technical world we inhabit.  This course explores the process of design and asks how managers can become better designers and interventionists who anticipate and evaluate the social, economic, and political consequences of existing and emerging products, processes, and organizational forms. Offered as DBAP 617 and EDMP 617. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the DM Program.
EDMP 638	Qualitative Inquiry I	3 Units	This course explores ways to conceptualize an object of study and facilitates formulation of students' conceptual work and production of research reports at the end of the first year of the program.  The course conveys how to generate research ideas by critically reviewing literature and developing ideas that contribute to a problem or issue of interest by working with theory and extending previous research.  The practicality of conducting certain kinds of research is evaluated and length, intensity and ethical constraints of different research efforts are examined.  Each student produces a report communicating and supporting a conceptualization of the phenomenon of interest involving independent, mediating and dependent variables.   The paper defines a problem of practice, presents, both visually and in narrative form, concepts shaped by field experience and prior writing that promote understanding of the problem, and includes a research proposal describing sample, data collection and data analysis. Offered as DBAP 638 and EDMP 638. Prereq: EDMP 665.
EDMP 640	Social Ethics: Contemporary Issues	3 Units	The course draws upon intellectual ancestors and current thinkers in moral philosophy and ethics to assist each student in identifying, analyzing, and discussing social and ethical questions pertaining to the definition and purpose of contemporary life, the need for moral coherence, and the meaning of life in a global society.  The unifying theme of the course is Tolstoy's question, "How then shall we live?"  The course does not seek to provide answers to the great questions of life.  Rather, it tries to expand each student's capacity to grapple with such questions. Offered as DBAP 640 and EDMP 640. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the DM Program.
EDMP 641	Qualitative Inquiry II	3 Units	This course guides the student in conducting the qualitative research project that was proposed in EDMP 638.  Fieldwork and initial analysis is conducted during the summer when data based on semi-structure interviews is collected and analysis begins using inductive coding techniques.  A summer residency is held in mid-June to assess progress as final data collection and analysis continues.  The aim of the fall semester is to prepare a formal research report on that project, which will be submitted to an academic research conference.  The final report includes a revision of one's conceptual model, integrating new understandings and literature arising from the data collection and analysis. Offered as DBAP 641 and EDMP 641. Prereq: EDMP 638.
EDMP 642	Directed Studies Seminar	0 - 9 Units	At different times during the Program, EDM students register for Directed Studies courses.  The purpose of these courses is to recognize the work the students are doing to conduct and present their individualized research at a high quality level.  Activities conducted under the Directed Studies courses are dedicated to the collection of qualitative or quantitative data and the preparation of research reports. Offered as DBAP 642 and EDMP 642. Prereq: Must be enrolled in DM program or PhD in Management: Designing Sustainable Systems track.
EDMP 643	Measuring Business Behaviors and Structures	3 Units	This course aims to develop the basic foundations and skills for designing and executing generalizable studies.  It focuses on building competence in model building, construct measurement, research design, data collection methodologies, and application of analytical software commonly involved in quantitative inquiry.  Covered topics include framing research questions, reliability and validity of measurement, quasi-experimental research design, and fieldwork for data collection.  Classes are designed to balance between the theory and practice of quantitative research design, and will be linked to the participant's own research projects. Offered as DBAP 643 and EDMP 643. Prereq: EDMP 641.
EDMP 645	Integration of Qualitative and Quantitative Inquiry	3 Units	Using the mixed method research toolkit developed in previous courses, this course focuses on critically analyzing selected pieces of published applied and policy research to develop a critical appreciation of issues and debates that have wide applicability and relevance.  In particular, it offers students ways to integrate and triangulate using a mixed method approach, different forms of evidence, and related evidence.  In addition, this course addresses common method choice and justification issues and related challenges of validity and theory formulation that typically arise during the students' execution of a series of individual research projects.  Application of critical analysis and appreciation approach in justifying mixed methods designs to the student's own research work is encouraged and supported by sharing and discussing common research and methodology themes and problems. Offered as DBAP 645 and EDMP 645. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the DM Program.
EDMP 646	Advanced Analytical Methods for Generalizing Research	3 Units	This course addresses advanced topics in regression and structural equation modeling such as latent growth curve models, partial least squares, logit models, tests for various types of invariance, multiple-group analysis, multilevel analysis, and analyzing qualitative/categorical data.  These analytical methods are intended to enhance the student's toolkit as to facilitate a strong bridge to the academic literature and the application to specific data based problems that arise in applied managerial research. Offered as DBAP 646 and EDMP 646. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the DM Program.
EDMP 648	Causal Analysis of Business Problems I	3 Units	Model Building & Validation I introduces fundamental concepts in theory-based model building and validation.  In this course students will develop, explore, refine and validate a range of models appropriate for addressing their problem of practice including classification models, process models, variance models, and articulating nomological networks.  In particular, the course will focus on effective conceptualizations of causation, control, mediation, and moderation.  Further, foundational statistical techniques such as tests of assumptions of the data, exploratory factor analysis, and regression and path analysis will be introduced. Offered as DBAP 648 and EDMP 648. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the DM Program.
EDMP 649	Causal Analysis of Business Problems II	3 Units	Building upon the first course in Model Building & Validation, this course will guide students through the theoretically-grounded variance models that are required for testing through structural equation modeling (SEM) in the quantitative portion of their research.  Fundamental concepts in model testing will be reinforced using path analysis, and will include a deeper exploration of moderation by addressing topics such as moderated mediation and interaction effects.  Beyond the analysis the course will emphasize precise and accurate formulation of theoretical models and associated reasoning, as well as careful interpretation of findings.  The class will also delve into testing of data assumptions and prepare students for the model testing portion of their capstone assignments. Offered as DBAP 649 and EDMP 649. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the DM Program.
EDMP 664	Knowledge Dissemination to Influence Managerial Practice	3 Units	The aim of this course is twofold.  First, it supports students organizing and writing their DM thesis overview or their PhD thesis proposal.  Also discussed are ways to organize and communicate in scientific genres, their aims and their generic properties.  Secondly, students become acquainted with scientific communication and publishing.  Effective reviewing, criteria for judging articles and theses, management of review processes, and how to communicate and respond to reviews are topics discussed.  The course also addresses publication strategies and ways of managing and communicating scientific and managerial knowledge to different stakeholders. Offered as DBAP 664 and EDMP 664. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the DM Program.
EDMP 665	Introduction to Research Inquiry	3 Units	This course begins participants' three-year research experience.  Energized by one's personal passion and commitment to the topic, we seek for the work to be accomplished at a level that makes it worthy of widespread dissemination and influence as engaged scholars.  The goal in this course is to prepare students to develop their minds as scholars by understanding the world of research; develop a research identity by identifying one's research domain; learn to read academic literature and write in a scholarly style; work with academic literature to identify and digest concepts and theories that inform research on that problem; begin to develop a conceptual model that abstracts how the world may be functioning in that problem domain and points to a research question that can guide the next stage of the research.  The final deliverable for this course is to present the research topic with substantiation for its significance, relevance and timeliness in the management field.  This would include the research question(s); the literature review; and proposed qualitative methodology and analytical approach(es). Offered as DBAP 665 and EDMP 665. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the DM Program.
EDMP 672	Flourishing Enterprise: Creating Sustainable Value for Business and World Benefit	3 Units	This course is designed to galvanize new visions of business and society, as well as organizational leadership.  The course is born of a conviction that the future of human society and the natural world is intimately linked to the future of the world economy, business enterprises, and management education.  The course presentations, books, dialogues, and interview projects are organized around three themes: (1) the state of the world and the economics possibilities of our time, (2) the business case for understanding business as an agent of world benefit--how business performance can profit from current and future advances in sustainable design and social entrepreneurship; and (3) tools for becoming a change leader--including the methods of Appreciative Inquiry and new insights about "strength-based" change emerging from the science of human strengths.  The overarching aim is to provide a powerful introduction to the many facets of sustainable value creation as a complete managerial approach. Offered as DBAP 672 and EDMP 672. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the DM Program.
EDMP 673	Understanding, Designing, Managing Complex Systems	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to provide a perspective on systems thinking and complex systems and aid PhD students in expanding the ideas in their research on systems, systems models, and complex systems.  The work of the course will develop with increasingly difficult books on the subject of complex systems, a major case study in health care, and individual applications of the concepts to their potential research model and methods. Offered as DBAP 673 and EDMP 673. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the DM Program.
EDMP 677	Designing Sustainable Systems	3 Units	Students in teams will recognize and work in practice on a managerial problem that involves dimensions of sustainability and design.  They will develop a set of solutions to the problem by generating alternative models and intervention strategies to address the problem.  The project results in a short presentation and written communication of the solution in a form of a poster or prototype.  The course will also include presentations of intervention and action research approaches and issues of inquiry validation and theory development. Offered as DBAP 677 and EDMP 677. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the DM Program.
EDMP 680	Conflict & Cooperation in the Global Arena	3 Units	The global arena is described by some as a realm of perpetual conflict.  Others argue that given the right institutions and incentives, international actors can find ways to achieve cooperation, peace and increased global prosperity.  Still others suggest that the international political and economic arena is "what you make of it"--emphasizing the role of norms, identities and ideas in shaping international outcomes.  This course will examine both theoretical and policy perspectives regarding the question of international conflict and cooperation, with a specific emphasis on drawing on insights from collective action theory and international relations scholarship. Offered as DBAP 680 and EDMP 680. Prereq: Must be enrolled in the DM Program.
EDMP 699	Applied Research Project Continuation	1 - 9 Units	This course is set up individually upon conference between the student and a DM Faculty member and is designed in consult with the DM Program Director in order to complete the student's required coursework and research requirements within the DM Program. Offered as DBAP 699 and EDMP 699. Prereq: EDMP 665.
EMBA 417	TEAMS	0 Unit	This course enables the formation of E.M.B.A. study groups and classroom learning environment by introducing participants to their adult learning styles, models of group decision-making, theories of team development and rules of engagement for effective learning teams. Prereq: E.M.B.A. students only.
EMBA 430	Health Informatics, Analytics & Decision Making	2.5 Units	Increasingly in today's healthcare environment, those aspiring to succeed in leadership positions are expected to know and do more than their primary discipline traditionally required. They are also expected to transform their organizations - whether they are departments or IDS's - to a higher state of quality, effectiveness, efficiency and competitiveness. To meet this expectation they must be able to harness the interrelated power of information, analytics and decision support to plan, evaluate, improve, and control their organization. This course is for executives in health care delivery, health planning, regulatory, or accrediting organizations who will be involved with, be responsible for, or oversee: The use and/or management of health or organizational information, and analytic and decision processes; The improvement / innovation of their organization's operations and decision processes; and/or The design, acquisition, implementation, and/or evaluation of health information technologies (HIT). The course is intended to develop competence and confidence in the participant's ability to understand and manage the complex information, analytics and decision environment. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 436	Accounting for Business Executives	2.5 Units	This course is an introduction to financial and managerial accounting, rather than a course in introductory accounting.  This course is designed for the business professional and is intended to prepare the student to use the information prepared by accountants.  It will not dwell in detail on the technical aspects of accounting or bookkeeping.  In addition, this course is designed to help the student become an effective user of cost information, from the perspective of parties internal to the firm.  This aspect of accounting is a compilation of techniques rather than a set of rules.  Since the information is for private use, the goal is to create the most meaningful and useful data for use by managers.  Assignments will be designed to develop the student's ability to analyze and interpret accounting data and to more effectively utilize accounting data in day to day business decisions.  Finally, this course is intended to strengthen abilities to identify problems and opportunities, to search out and analyze desired information leading to a well-reasoned conclusion, and to perform sensitivity analysis around that conclusion, using financial information. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 437	Economic Analysis for Managers	2.5 Units	This course, which is limited to students in the Executive M.B.A. program, explores the basic elements of the economic system which the executive needs to know in order to understand how the firm interacts with the system and how economic factors affect decision making. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 438A	Business Statistics and Quantitative Analysis	1.25 Unit	In this course, students study the use of modern quantitative and business statistics to support the executive decision-making process.  With the help of computer software, the models examined assist in describing and analyzing problems and suggesting possible managerial actions.  The techniques discussed include tools for decision making under uncertainty including regression analysis.  This course is part of a two (2) course sequence. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 438B	Business Statistics and Quantitative Analysis	1.25 Unit	In this course, students study the use of modern quantitative and business statistics to support the executive decision-making process.  With the help of computer software, the models examined assist in describing and analyzing problems and suggesting possible managerial actions.  The techniques discussed include tools for decision making under uncertainty including regression analysis.   This course is part of a two (2) course sequence. Prereq: EMBA 438A
EMBA 439	Corporate Finance	2.5 Units	The central organizing principle of this course is to familiarize the class with the basics of valuation.  This first course in finance introduces the tools and methods employed in valuation of projects and corporate securities.  Valuation involves the determination of (i) cash flows of the firm, project or financial assets and (ii) the discount rates that are used to compute the present values of the cash flows.  Asset pricing models provide the underpinnings for the development of the discount rates.  The material is synthesized in capital budgeting exercises which are cost-benefit analyses of capital project cash flows to evaluate whether they are value enhancing. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 441	Leading Change: Self	2.5 Units	The primary objective of Leading Change: Self is to learn a method for assessing your knowledge, abilities, values, and interests relevant to leadership and executive management so that you will be able to develop and implement a plan for enhancing your leadership and executive capability throughout your career and life. The enabling objectives are: (a) To systematically identify your current and desired capability (i.e., knowledge, abilities, values, and interests); (b) To develop an individualized learning agenda and plan for the next 3-5 years; and (c) To explore techniques to assist others in doing the same.  This course will explore questions, such as: Who are effective leaders? How are they different than mangers? How do they think and act? What makes us want to follow them? How are leaders developed? How can people help others become effective leaders? What type of leader do I want to be? And, what can I do to become that type of leader? Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 442	Innovation	2.5 Units	Organizations are under continuous pressure to be efficient and productive in order to generate (often short-term) profit. At the same time they must innovate to remain competitive in the long-term. Innovation involves the generation, development, and delivery of new products, processes, or businesses. Intrapreneurs are those who can successfully bring new ideas to fruition in established organizations. Innovation in the context of an established organization requires that intrapreneurs fundamentally understand the dynamics of innovation and innovation management. This course introduces fundamental concepts associated with innovation in the context of an established organization. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 443	Supply Chain Management	2.5 Units	Operations managers, ranging from supervisors to vice presidents, are concerned with the production of goods and services.  More specifically, they are responsible for designing, running, controlling and improving the systems that accomplish production.  This course is a broad-spectrum course with emphasis on techniques and information that are helpful to the practice of management in general and at any level.  We will discuss commonly occurring application problems such as process analysis, inventory control, quality management, just-in-time concepts, etc.  The field of operations management was originally concerned with manufacturing systems.  But many of the same ideas apply, and the same trade-offs are present, in service organizations like health care, insurance, hotel-management, airlines and government related operations.  Several manufacturing and non-manufacturing environments will be discussed explicitly, and the emphasis will be on the fundamentals of the operations function in an organization.  Also we will explore the interface of operations management with other functional areas such as marketing, finance, accounting, etc. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 445	Expanding Boundaries	2.5 Units	This course will help you understand the keys to successful corporate development-competitive advantage in every business in which a firm is involved.  In particular, the course will help the participants to understand the following: -Corporate development strategy through capabilities and leveragable capabilities -Before venturing into a new business, the firm has to have a clear understanding of the critical capabilities required for success in the new business. -Firms can increase the odds of success if they can leverage  (parts of ) existing capabilities to new businesses. -Corporate development strategies-adapting to a market -Analyze the industry environment in order to select the competitive battlefield to increase the odds of success by leveraging some of your existing capabilities - sometimes also known as core competencies.  This is a relatively low risk strategy.  We will develop methodologies that will allow you to identify markets (segments) where your current capabilities are leveragable. -Shaping a market usually requires developing a completely new set of capabilities - very risky.  We will develop concepts to understand techniques to mitigate these risks. -Acquisitions as one of the means for corporate development -Approximately half of the class sessions will be devoted to the specific case of acquisitions as a means to expand the boundaries of a firm.  We will explore both how acquisitions contribute to competitive advantage and the selection process and integration of the acquired entity.  Less emphasis will be placed on strict financial valuations and negotiations. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 446	Managing Risk and Real Options	2.5 Units	The course seeks to help corporate managers understand how financial design can be used to advance the goals and strategies of the firm.  In the Finance course, you concentrated almost exclusively on the firm's capital expenditure decision.  You studied in great detail the discounted cash flow model, NPV, how you get your cash flows, and how you discount according to risk.  Now we move to the other side of the balance sheet to look at how the firm can finance these expenditures.  The first part of this class provides the basic building blocks of financial engineering which begins with call and put options.  The course focuses on using derivatives (calls and puts) to change a firm's risk profile with respect to equity, interest rate, foreign exchange, credit, and commodity risks.  We look at capital structure decisions and securitization issues and discuss what it means to create optimal structures.  Almost immediately we will tie this to our financial crisis and obtain an appreciation for financial designs that could be setup so as to enhance firm value, mitigate systemic risks, or accomplish specific sustainable goals in a global economy.  The second part of the class is geared towards real options and its relationship to strategic planning. In competitive markets, no one expects to formulate a detailed long-term plan and follow it mindlessly.  As soon as we start down the path, we begin learning about business conditions, competitors' actions, and so forth and we need to respond flexibly to what we learn.  Unfortunately, the financial tool most widely relied on to estimate the value of strategy, DCF, assumes that we follow a predetermined plan, regardless of how events unfold.  A better approach to valuation would incorporate both the uncertainty inherent in business and the active decision making required for strategy to succeed. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 449	Contemporary Issues in Management	2.5 Units	This course is intended to address the contemporary issues in management to be decided by faculty and student interest.  With the current global economic crisis, this year the course will focus on International Finance and Economics.  In subsequent years, the topics will evolve as the global business climate changes. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 450	Managerial Marketing	2.5 Units	This course is designed with three overarching objectives. The first is an emphasis on decision making in a broad range of market contexts. The second objective builds on the notion that decision making is dynamic; that is, market situations demand not just one good decision but a series of them as a situation unfolds (providing new and varied information for each subsequent decision). Integrating concepts from a number of the courses that you are taking concurrently into decision-making about markets is a final objective. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 451	Business Model Design	2.5 Units	In most companies the process of designing business models is an ad hoc process and in my opinion an inefficient process.  In this course you will learn a systematic but iterative process to do this.  We will expose you to some broad categories of business models and internalize the basic logic of how to make money in each of these categories.  The first step is to recognize which of these categories is most applicable to your business.  The second step is to customize these broad patterns to the specifics of the business at hand.  This seems easy because everything is in English and there are no hard formulas to figure out.  However, unless you discipline yourself to systematically go through a structured process (there are other equally valid processes than the ones you'll be exposed to) it is very easy to fall into the ad hoc trap.  You will internalize this process by applying it over a wide range of business situations that will give you confidence in its applicability to any business opportunity.  After the completion of this course you should be quickly able to draw the outline of a business model for any business opportunity that you're considering. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 458	Healthcare Financial Management	2.5 Units	This course will consider basic financial concepts, techniques, and strategies for institutions and companies in the U.S. health care delivery system.  Note that this may differ from the influences one would find in a different country since the payment system and ownership structures vary widely around the world.  These basics include relevant factors in the economic, medical, and financial environment that shape an intelligent financial decision.  Therefore, although the course is directed towards financial management decisions in health delivery organizations, it may also be useful for those who supply the industry (equipment, drugs and services), purchase services from it (employers, third party administrators, health plans) or finance these (insurance, banking, investors).  Public policy and the structure of the industry also play an important role in the course.  However, the general approach is from the point of view of a decision-maker in a health care organizational setting dealing with issues with important economic or financial dimensions. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 459	Health Economics and Strategy	2.5 Units	The central goal of this course is for students to master essential economic concepts and their application to critical issues in the U.S. healthcare economy.  After taking this course, students should be able to:  1. Understand basic microeconomic theory as it applies to firm and consumer behavior in healthcare and health insurance markets.  2. Understand the role of market forces (including market failures) and public policy in determining the price and allocation of medical services.  3. Understand the underlying causes of "changing market conditions" and the challenges and opportunities they create for healthcare organizations.  4. Converse fluently and accurately about the economic forces at play in the healthcare economy. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 464	Legal Environment	2.5 Units	This course provides a brief overview of the legal system that managers face, with an emphasis on contracts, corporate law, property rights and the modern regulatory apparatus of government.  Contracts include full coverage of the Uniform Commercial Code.  Corporate law is the capstone of the consideration of other forms of business organizations such as partnerships.  Regulatory areas include employment law and environmental law.  Property coverage includes modern struggles over intellectual ownership claims (patents, copyrights, etc.). Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 472	Leading Change: The Organization	2.5 Units	Participants in this course will be challenged to enhance their leadership capacity by assessing and analyzing the knowledge, abilities, values and interests relevant to executives.  The course will also explore the art of reading and understanding organizations in ways that help us imagine, design, and develop organization excellence. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 473	Leading Change: Teams	2.5 Units	Sustainability of effective leadership is necessary for adaptive, resilient organizations and for the health and functioning of the leader.  Chronic stress results in diminished cognitive functioning, as well as poor health and a contagion of negative mood in organizations.  The latest advances in social neuroscience and endocrinology will be used to develop an understanding how someone in a leadership position can renew themselves and mitigate the ravages of chronic stress.  The short course will focus on how to coach others toward renewal and sustainability. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 475	Managing in a Global Economy	3 Units	This course is designed to present first-hand issues in international management.  It accomplishes this by means of readings, a written assignment and, most importantly, an international trip designed to witness different management cultures, styles and environments for business in the international community.  Faculty responsibility rests with the Faculty Director of the E.M.B.A. Program as well as a "Resident -Faculty" specific to each field trip.  Such faculty are drawn from the Weatherhead community and vary by the design and destination of the trip.  In addition, the course is staffed by an administrative assistant from the complement of Dively CMDR staff.  Occasionally and where appropriate, there is also "in-tourist" assistance in some of our foreign locations Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 476	Corporate Governance and Dialogues in Healthcare	2.5 Units	The course incorporates insights from leaders in a number of dialogue sessions and is grounded in the following themes:  -The role of the board of directors;  -Leadership in healthcare organizations; -The CEO relationship to the firm's principal stakeholders (shareholders, board of directors, employees, customers) and the CEO's responsibility to give back (time and money) to the community;  -CEO role in developing and maintaining the organization's vision, values and corporate culture. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 478A	Leading Design in Organization	1.25 Unit	This course explores the ideas and methods of design as a new approach to management practices that is well suited to the changing environment that organizations face in contemporary culture and the emerging economic environment in the United States and abroad.  It is a studio course as well as a seminar, because it is designed around a project that each student brings to the EMBA program, a project that is grounded in the issues and operations of the student's organization or in the kind of organization that the student wishes to explore.  In addition to the yearlong project, the course will also include important readings in management and organizational literature that are relevant to the new direction of strategic thinking.  Finally, the course will draw on the expertise of other faculty at the Weatherhead School of Management who will be called upon to share their practical expertise and theoretical knowledge in the development and execution of the student's management design project, whether in the area of vision and strategy, new product development of goods and services, operations, organizational design and configuration, or related topics.  This is the first part of a two semester course. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 478B	Leading Design in Organizations	1.25 Unit	This course explores the ideas and methods of design as a new approach to management practices that is well suited to the changing environment that organizations face in contemporary culture and the emerging economic environment in the United States and abroad.  It is a studio course as well as a seminar, because it is designed around a project that each student brings to the EMBA program, a project that is grounded in the issues and operations of the student's organization or in the kind of organization that the student wishes to explore.  In addition to the yearlong project, the course will also include important readings in management and organizational literature that are relevant to the new direction of strategic thinking.  Finally, the course will draw on the expertise of other faculty at the Weatherhead School of Management who will be called upon to share their practical expertise and theoretical knowledge in the development and execution of the student's management design project, whether in the area of vision and strategy, new product development of goods and services, operations, organizational design and configuration, or related topics.  This is the second part of a two semester course. Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EMBA 479	Leading Change: Society	2.5 Units	This course explores a proposition: that business, the motor of our society has the opportunity to be a new creative force on the planet, a force that could contribute to the well being of many.  Our exploration and search is for "business as an agent of world benefit" and the questions are many: what does it look like, where is it happening, what are the market, societal and leadership enablers, and what are the results? Prereq: E.M.B.A. candidates only.
EFDA 111	Tooth Morphology for the EFDA	1 Unit	Instructional laboratory sessions provide experience with viewing models of teeth as well as reproducing teeth in wax.  Mastery of terminology and basic facts of dental anatomy and tooth positions of permanent and primary teeth.  Introduction of proper instrumentation begins.
EFDA 113	Dental Materials for the EFDA	1 Unit	Instructional laboratory sessions cover the physical and chemical properties and uses and manipulation of materials used in protection of the pulp and intracoronal temporization.  Composition, properties and manipulation of dental amalgam, composite and pit and fissure sealant materials are also introduced.  Isolation techniques and rubber dam placement lab.
EFDA 115	Restorative Dentistry for the EFDA I	3 Units	Skill development in the placement and carving of Class I, II, V and complex amalgam restorations on the typodont.  Skill development in the placement and finishing and polishing of Class I, II, III, IV, and V composite restoration and amalgam restoration finishing and polishing on the typodont.  Continued skill development in instrumentation, body positioning and ergonomics.  Skill development in the use of low and high speed handpieces for rotary instrument use in finishing and polishing restorations.  Skill development in self-evaluation using specific criteria.  Pit and fissure sealant applications. **Student must show competency of skills acquired to be able to progress in Clinical Practicum for the EFDA**.
EFDA 116	Restorative Dentistry for the EFDA II	2 Units	Students begin preparation for the state board examination by demonstrating successful completion of amalgam and composite restorations with increasingly difficult grading evaluation, mastery of self evaluation skills, decreasing restoration placement time and by completing 3 mock board examinations.  Students must pass a final clinical and didactic examination to pass the course.  Emphasis on understanding Ohio EFDA Registration protocol.
EFDA 120	Clinical Practicum for the EFDA	2 Units	Students fulfill the Ohio State Dental Board requirement of having clinical experience on patients in CWRU approved dental clinics.  Clinic sessions include a variety of restorative experiences on many patients.  One 8 hour session is required for 4 weeks.  Students will restore patients' teeth under the supervision of a licensed dentist and a clinical supervisor in clinics affiliated with CWRU.  Emphasis is placed on restoring metallic and non-metallic restorations.
FNCE 401	Financial Orientation	1.5 Unit	This is a mandatory preparatory/refresher course for all entering Master of Finance students. It will cover basic topics in statistics, financial accounting and in financial management, so that all students can hit the road running with the other core courses in the first semester. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 403	Corporate Financial Technology	3 Units	This course is focused on the many aspects of the development in Financial Technology from recent notable successes to the current edge and thoughts about the future.  Topics covered will include "FinTech" Applications, Incubators and Angels, Block Chains, Crypto-currencies, Crowdfunding, and Payment Schemes.  Topics can change from semester to semester, in tune with changing technology.  Offered as BAFI 403 and FNCE 403. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 403C	Financial Management	1.5 Unit	Serves as a perquisite for several advanced electives in banking and finance.  Its purpose is to familiarize the student with the theory and application of models used in financial decision-making by corporations.  Issues relating to efficient markets, financing decisions, capital budgeting, risk and return, and securities valuation are among the topics considered. Prereq: For Master of Finance students in Shanghai, China
FNCE 404	Financial Modeling	3 Units	This is a course about financial modeling.  It covers a range of topics in the field of financial economics.  Each topic is chosen because it lends itself to  financial modeling.  The primary focus of the course is to relate the theory of finance to practical and usable spreadsheet models that will assist a financial manager with a firm's investment and financing decisions.  Spreadsheet models have been the dominant vehicle for finance professionals to practice their trade.  This course will utilize Excel and challenge the student to improve their finance and modeling skills.  Students will improve their familiarity with financial data analysis through various exercises that incorporate completed models.  In summary, the course is designed to increase your practical understanding of core concepts in finance, help you develop hands-on spreadsheet modeling skills, and strengthen your ability to perform financial data analysis within an Excel model. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 404C	Financial Modeling & Value	1.5 Unit	Firms try to create value.  In their day-to-day operations, they are faced with numerous challenges: Should we accept trade credit or borrow?  Will an acquisition create or destroy value?  Should we introduce a new product line even if it cannibalizes an existing one? In each of these situations they try to quantify the impact on the value of their firm.  The goal of this course is to develop your skills in financial modeling and valuation, so you can tackle issues like the ones described above.  The course is designed to be "hands-on": You will learn to apply the theory and develop spreadsheet modeling skills through homework, case studies and a group project. By the end of the course you will have a good understanding of both the theory and practice of valuation, and possess a set of cutting-edge financial modeling skills. This course is designed for students who aspire to work in a regular company, a bank or a consulting firm in (i) corporate finance (including mergers and acquisitions); (ii) strategy; or (iii) equity analysis. Prereq: For Master of Finance students in Shanghai, China
FNCE 421	Corporate Financial Analysis	3 Units	This course is designed to lay the analytic foundation for careers in corporate finance, banking, consulting, and investment banking. The objective of the course is to strengthen students' conceptual understanding and problem-solving skills, and teach them how to think on their feet. Topics covered include Economic cash flows and valuation, Valuation methods, Long term financial planning and ratios analysis, Growth and external financing, Managerial options and valuation, Capital structure, and Payout policy. Topics covered may change from semester to semester. The course envisages use of spreadsheets and case studies, and will emphasize on links to real-world events. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 428	Financial Strategy and Value Creation	3 Units	The intersection between the theory of perfect markets and the reality of market imperfections provides the basis for the exploration of value creation in this course.  Opportunities in both product and financial markets are explored using case studies to develop a framework for strategic financial decisions. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 428C	Financial Strategies and Value Creation	1.5 Unit	The intersection between the theory of perfect markets and the reality of market imperfections provides the basis for the exploration of value creation in this course.  Opportunities in both product and financial markets are explored using case studies to develop a framework for strategic financial decisions. Prereq: For Master of Finance students in Shanghai, China
FNCE 429	Investment Management	3 Units	This course explores the characteristics of financial investments and markets and develops modern techniques of investment analysis and management.  The goal is to help students develop a level of analytical skill and institutional knowledge sufficient to make sensible investment decisions.  Topics include: an overview of stock, debt and derivative asset markets, practical applications of modern portfolio theory, equilibrium and arbitrage-based approaches to capital market pricing, the debate over market efficiency, the term structure of interest rates, bond portfolio management, and uses of derivative assets in investment portfolios. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 429C	Portfolio Management and Asset Allocation	3 Units	This course explores the characteristics of financial investments and markets and develops modern techniques of investment analysis and management.  The goal is to help students develop a level of analytical skill and institutional knowledge sufficient to make sensible investment decisions.  Topics include: an overview of stock, debt and derivative asset markets, practical applications of modern portfolio theory, equilibrium and arbitrage-based approaches to capital market pricing, the debate over market efficiency, the term structure of interest rates, bond portfolio management, and uses of derivative assets in investment portfolios. Prereq: For Master of Finance students in Shanghai, China
FNCE 430	Derivatives and Risk Management	3 Units	This course is intended to give students an understanding of options and futures markets both in theory and practice.  The emphasis is on arbitrage and hedging.  The course concentrates on listed common stock and index contracts as well as commodity markets.  Various theories for trading strategies are studied. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 430C	Derivatives Markets and Models	3 Units	This course is intended to give students an understanding of options and futures markets both in theory and practice.  The emphasis is on arbitrage and hedging.  The course concentrates on listed common stock and index contracts as well as commodity markets.  Various theories for trading strategies are studied. Prereq: For Master of Finance students in Shanghai, China
FNCE 431	Fixed Income Markets and Their Derivatives	3 Units	This class is concerned with fixed income securities, interest rate risk management, and credit risk.  Fixed income securities account for about two thirds of the market value of all outstanding securities, and hence this topic is important.  The course covers the basic products of fixed income markets including treasury and LIBOR products, such as interest rate swaps.  Risk management and hedging strategies are covered as well as selected topics in credit risk models and mortgage-backed securities. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 431C	Fixed Income Markets and Models	1.5 Unit	This class is concerned with fixed income securities, interest rate risk management, and credit risk.  Fixed income securities account for about two thirds of the market value of all outstanding securities, and hence this topic is important.  The course covers the basic products of fixed income markets including treasury and LIBOR products, such as interest rate swaps.  Risk management and hedging strategies are covered as well as selected topics in credit risk models and mortgage-backed securities. Prereq: For Master of Finance students in Shanghai, China
FNCE 432	Corporate Risk Management	3 Units	This is a risk management course aimed at participants who wish to enhance their understanding of the risks faced by corporate firms, both financial and non-financial, learn techniques to identify and measure these risks, and understand how derivatives and risk management solutions can be used to manage these risks, create value, and advance the strategic goals of the firm.  Offered as BAFI 432 and FNCE 432. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 432C	Corporate Risk Management	1.5 Unit	This is a unique strategic risk management course aimed at participants who wish to enhance their understanding of the risks faced by corporate firms, both financial and non-financial, learn techniques to identify and measure these risks, and understand how derivatives and risk management solutions can be used to manage these risks, create value, and advance the strategic goals of the firm.  The course is designed in a manner such that it would be of use to executives of all corporations, financial and nonfinancial, across all functional areas. Prereq: For Master of Finance students in Shanghai, China
FNCE 433	Quantitative Risk Modeling	3 Units	This course is designed to help students learn quantitative models for estimating risk in various financial settings for different types of financial institutions (banks, hedge funds, and others). It is a very hands-on course where students will become familiar with several state-of-the-art quantitative risk models as well as their detailed implementation procedure in the real world. The course uses several in-class Excel exercises to illustrate the models as well as their practical implementation using real financial data. Offered as BAFI 433 and FNCE 433. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 433C	Quantitative Risk Modeling	3 Units	This course exposes students to state-of-the-art quantitative techniques in risk modeling. The course covers the analytical as well as simulation based implementation of different types of risk models using Excel, including several Value-at-Risk (VaR) models. It also covers volatility modeling, correlation estimation, extreme value theory, back-testing, and stress testing of risk models. This course is for Master of Finance (China) students. Prereq: For Master of Finance students in Shanghai, China
FNCE 434	Financial Analytics and Banking	3 Units	This course will cover empirical and analytical aspects of banking, including loan origination, syndication, sales, stress-testing and securitization;  capital adequacy, regulation and supervision; methods of measuring and managing value at risk, credit risk, interest rate risk, liquidity risk, and other risk; credit market information, feedback, and signaling. Offered as BAFI 434 and FNCE 434. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 434C	Financial Econometrics	3 Units	This course represents a rigorous study of the latest developments in the area of financial econometrics. It assumes that you have had a basic statistics class and that you have had regression analysis. It is taught using economic motivations and examples from the financial world. The course concerns modern econometric topics like time-series forecasting, volatility modeling, and panel data analysis. Various concepts and approaches in the course will be subjected to real world data. Students are expected to have basic knowledge of the fundamentals of corporate finance and statistics. The course aims at providing a lasting conceptual framework for model building using modern applied econometric techniques commonly employed in finance. Prereq: For Master of Finance students in Shanghai, China
FNCE 435	Empirical Finance	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to empirical analysis and research in finance.  This involves the management of empirical datasets and the aspects of quantitative applications of finance theory.  The goal is to enable the student to deal with the need to analyze complex and large financial and economic datasets that is present in many fields of the financial profession.  The scope of the data as well as the quantitative methods used in such analysis often requires familiarity with robust computational environments and statistical packages.  As such, another goal of the course is to familiarize the student with at least one such environment.  Applications are conducted using real financial and economic data.  The course draws on the theoretical aspects of the subjects covered, but mainly focuses on the practical matters required to undertake an empirical analysis of financial topics--e.g., the definition of the research question, the datasets required, the computational needs, and, then, the implementation.  The course enables the student to evaluate outstanding financial research as well as to conduct his or her own research. Offered as BAFI 435 and FNCE 435. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 436A	Individual, Team and Career Development	.75 Unit	This course is designed to focus on three areas of development critical to students' personal and professional success: 1) Individual; 2) Team; and 3) Career.  The individual and team aspects include developing self and other awareness through exploration of learning styles, process skills, and building communication and presentation competencies.  Career development includes a focus on strategies for success such as networking, resume building, and learning from executives through intensive and interactive seminars.  The course involves use of assessments, group discussions, presentations and experiential activities. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 436B	Individual, Team and Career Development	.75 Unit	This course is designed to focus on three areas of development critical to students' personal and professional success: 1) Individual; 2) Team; and 3) Career.  The individual and team aspects include developing self and other awareness through exploration of learning styles, process skills, and building communication and presentation competencies.  Career development includes a focus on strategies for success such as networking, resume building, and learning from executives through intensive and interactive seminars.  The course involves use of assessments, group discussions, presentations and experiential activities. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 436D	Individual, Team, and Career Development	0 Unit	This course is designed to focus on three areas of development critical to a student's personal and professional success:  individual, team, and career development. This will be accomplished through a project with a company so that students get a real-life experience related to their field of study. This experience provides students with the opportunity to explore their career interests while applying knowledge learned in the classroom in a real-life setting.  The experience also helps students build their professional networks and be part of a team assigned to work on the corporate project. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 440	Financial Decisions Modeling and Analytics	3 Units	The firm is a nexus of contracts among its various stakeholders (e.g., managers, shareholders, debt holders). In this course, we will examine Valuation, Quantitative Analysis of Real Options, Asymmetric Information, Agency Cost, Incentive Contracts and Performance Metrics, Regulation and Reputation. The takeaway learnings from this course are: (a) Understanding how value can be created or destroyed, (b) Measuring/quantifying value using financial big data, (c) Understanding the links between capital structure and asymmetric information, market reactions and signaling, agency and management incentives, taxes and shareholder, bondholder conflicts, (d) Understanding the links between payout policy and informational content, market reaction, stock returns and signaling, and clientele effects, and (e) design of Performance Metrics. We will download corporate financial data (financial big data) from research databases, and conduct empirical analysis to understand the value implications of financial decisions. Excel/SAS will be used. We will analyze case studies and real-world events. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 440C	Financial Decisions, Contracting and Value	1.5 Unit	This course exposes the students to in-depth treatment of topics that include investment decisions, financing decisions, payout decisions, contracting decisions and performance metrics, internal control systems, risk management, real options, diversification and valuation. Topics covered may vary from semester to semester. Prereq: For Master of Finance students in Shanghai, China
FNCE 441AC	Global Banking and Capital Markets I	1.5 Unit	This course will expose students to Banking and Capital Market Structure, Practices, and Regulations. Topics covered include the financial services industry, especially  commercial banking and investment banking, regulatory framework, market reactions to various corporate events, understanding risk, the return demanded by investors, activists involvement in target firms, and market reactions to such events. Several case studies are used to expose students to different issues and questions that arise in the day-to-day jobs of financial managers in this industry. Prereq: For Master of Finance students in Shanghai, China
FNCE 441BC	Global Banking and Capital Markets II	1.5 Unit	This course will expose students to Banking and Capital Market Structure, Practices, and Regulations. Topics covered include the financial services industry, especially  commercial banking and investment banking, regulatory framework, market reactions to various corporate events, understanding risk, the return demanded by investors, activists involvement in target firms, and market reactions to such events. Several case studies are used to expose students to different issues and questions that arise in the day-to-day jobs of financial managers in this industry. Prereq: For Master of Finance students in Shanghai, China
FNCE 444	Entrepreneurial Finance	3 Units	The objective of this course is to introduce students to the issues of financial management and capital formation in new ventures. The course will address issues of estimation of cash requirements, development of pro forma financial plans, firm valuation and the process and tools used in raising debt and equity financing. Bootstrapping, angel investing, venture capital, strategic alliances and initial public offerings will be covered. The emphasis is on the entrepreneur and how he/she can assess financial needs and develop a sensible plan for acquiring financial resources in a manner that is consistent with their financial needs and other strategic goals. Offered as BAFI 444 and FNCE 444. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 450	Mergers and Acquisitions	3 Units	This course examines the economic rationale and motivation for the different merger and acquisition and recapitalization activity undertaken by firms and individuals in the U.S. market.  Emphasis is on the different three (3) methods of valuing a firm, the various forms of debt and equity capital employed to fund mergers and acquisitions and recapitalizations, how lenders and investors structure their loans and/or investments, and how investors realize the gains through different exit strategies.  The course gives the student an excellent understanding of the role that senior commercial banks, insurance companies, pensions funds, LBO funds, investment banking firms, and venture/growth capital investors play in mergers and acquisitions. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 450C	Corporate Valuation and M&A Restructuring	1.5 Unit	This course examines the economic rationale and motivation for the different merger and acquisition and recapitalization activity undertaken by firms and individuals in the U.S. market.  Emphasis is on the comparable publicly traded proxy company, comparable "change of control" transaction, and discounted cash flow methods of valuing a firm.  The class will also review the different types of debt and equity capital employed to fund mergers and acquisitions and recapitalization, how senior lenders and equity investors structure their loans and/or investments, and how investors realize the gains through different exit strategies.  The legal and tax ramifications of various forms of M&A activity are also discussed.  The course gives the student an excellent understanding of the role that senior commercial banks, insurance companies, pensions funds, LBO funds, investment banking firms, and venture/growth capital investors play in mergers and acquisitions and will strengthen the students' ability to value a business enterprise. Prereq: For Master of Finance students in Shanghai, China
FNCE 455C	A Foundation in Basic Concepts of Innovations and Applications for Financial Technology	3 Units	Over last few years, field of finance has experienced a burst of technological advances that have disrupted and transformed traditional methods of accessing, allocating, and transferring capital. Understanding the evolution of traditional finance methods is increasingly important for finance students so they can meaningfully distinguish advantages and disadvantages of traditional versus emerging methods and models. Main objective of course is to provide foundation in basic concepts of these innovations and their applications. It is this collective financial technology focus that has garnered the name of FinTech. This course will cover many aspects of FinTech proliferation, from notable successes to current innovations and thoughts about future opportunities. Topics will include FinTech applications, blockchains, cryptocurrencies, crowdfunding, payment systems and trading technology. This list may change from semester to semester, in tune with changing technology and as business models become disrupted. Prereq: For Master of Finance students in Shanghai, China
FNCE 460	Investment Strategies	3 Units	This course provides a broad survey of some of the main strategies used by hedge funds today. Through exercises and projects, the hedge fund strategies will be presented using real data. Students will learn to use a methodology referred to as "back testing" in order to evaluate hedge fund strategies. The course will also cover institutional details related to short selling, liquidity, margin requirements, risk management, and performance measurement. Since hedge funds today use advanced modeling techniques, the course will require students to analyze and manipulate real data using mathematical modeling. The objective of the course is for students to gain practical knowledge about creating, back-testing, and implementing hedge fund trading strategies. Offered as BAFI 460 and FNCE 460. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 460C	Investment Strategies	1.5 Unit	The class describes some of the main strategies used by hedge funds and provides a methodology to analyze them.  In class and through exercises, the strategies will be illustrated using real data and students will learn to use "back testing" to evaluate a strategy. Throughout the semester, we will discuss the economics underlying these strategies and we will analyze why certain strategies might work and why others might not. The class also covers institutional issues related to short selling, liquidity, and performance measurement.  The class is fairly quantitative. As a result of the advanced techniques used in state-of-the-art hedge funds, the class requires the students to work hard, analyze and manipulate real data, and use mathematical modeling. Prereq: For Master of Finance students in Shanghai, China
FNCE 470	Financial Models Using Big Data	3 Units	This course is focused on developing models in investments using financial big data.  A strong theoretical base will be developed and then relevant empirical analyses using real data will be used for testing models, via individual assignments and group projects.  In the projects, groups of students will be immersed in collecting, analyzing, and interpreting financial big data sets. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 471	Applications in Financial Big Data	3 Units	This course is project-based and focused on solving real-life problems using financial big data.  Groups of students will collect/use data, estimate parameters, and conduct appropriate validation tests.  Not only do the members have to work together, but they also have to be professional, make interim reports, and communicate effectively with each other. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 480	Global Banking & Capital Markets	3 Units	This course will expose students to Banking and Capital Market Structure, Practices, and Regulations in North America, Europe, as well as Asia.  Students will learn about structure of the financial services industry in different parts of the world, the history and evolution of the regulatory frameworks in this industry, and its consequent impact on financial and economic development as well as risk.  Several case studies are used to expose students to different issues and questions that arise in the day-to-day jobs of financial managers in this industry. Offered as BAFI 480 and FNCE 480. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 480C	International Finance	1.5 Unit	This course introduces students to international finance and foreign exchange risk management by corporations.  Topics include foreign exchange markets and international financial institutions; fx contracts; exchange rate risk and corporate risk management; and international aspects of long-term financing. Prereq: For Master of Finance students in Shanghai, China
FNCE 490	Cases in Applied Corporate and Real Estate Valuation	3 Units	This course is focused on engaging groups of students in identifying, analyzing and making decisions on real-world corporate financial problems.  Teams of students will be assigned to a specific client situation drawn from one of four general areas: (i) mergers and acquisitions (involving corporations and/or leveraged buyout firms),  (ii) public equities (IPOs and/or equity research), (iii) corporate financial policies and transactions or (iv) real estate.  Learning will include lectures, structured problem solving using live case studies and an  in-depth project in which will evaluate an actual current business opportunity and present it to a panel of industry veterans.  In addition to learning deeper financial skills, the course will enhance unstructured problem solving, project management, team building and high level communications skills. Offered as BAFI 490 and FNCE 490. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 491	Python Programming w Appl in Finance	3 Units	There are two parts to this course.  (i	In the first part we learn the basics of Python programming language by solving a sequence of rather simple problems each focusing on broadening your knowledge. At each stage we introduce important commands of Python and slowly learn the structure of object oriented programming with Python. The objective is to make you Python literate.  (ii	The second part of the class is for you to tackle significant financial problems either in risk management or in corporate finance using the Python language as the primary tool to do the analysis. You will develop a series of financial models in your track and then tackle two major projects which will utilize all the skills developed. Offered as BAFI 491 and FNCE 491. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 493	Blockchains, Cryptocurrencies, and Cryptoventures	3 Units	It behooves today's business leaders to be well acquainted with blockchain technologies and AI, two seemingly disparate technologies that have the potential to fundamentally disrupt a wide range of businesses. The popularity of blockchain technologies has increased exponentially since the release of bitcoin in 2009. While bitcoins garnered a lot of attention during the initial days, the focus has shifted over time to the underlying technology: blockchain. This wildly innovative technology has made possible tasks that were hitherto deemed implausible: validate ownership in a digital asset, verify the true state of a transaction without relying on a costly intermediary etc. Accurate predictions and sound judgements are two critical ingredients of any decision making process. While the jury is still out on whether algorithms can make sound judgements, recent developments in a field called machine learning (and its sub-field, deep learning) have led to dramatic improvements in the accuracy of predictions made by these algorithms. Significantly, this gain in accuracy has been accompanied by a reduction in overall costs. These in turn have spurred the recent interest in AI. Organizations that have enabled AI at the enterprise level appear to be making more informed decisions and innovating new products. In this course, we will unpack these technologies and examine a wide range of relevant business use cases. Our objective is to provide a practical introduction to these key technologies and their business implications. We focus on business perspectives, rather than on the technical dimensions. Fittingly, this course is open to all graduate students of Weatherhead School (MBA and all specialty Masters). Students are not expected to have any specific programming background; however, a basic understanding of statistics is required to better appreciate the discourse on Artificial Intelligence.  Offered as BTEC 493, FNCE 493 and FTEC 493. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FNCE 494	Artificial Intelligence for Financial Modeling	3 Units	This is a hands-on course on Artificial Intelligence (A.I.) where the emphasis is not only on understanding the theoretical underpinnings of various AI models but also on building, evaluating, and critiquing A.I. models as they apply to the finance industry. This course begins with an introduction of Machine Learning models; various key ideas such as bias-variance tradeoff, cross-validation, regularization techniques are introduced with relevant examples from Finance. The course then proceeds to discuss Artificial Neural Networks and its relevance to Deep Learning. Foundational ideas such as back-propagation are discussed in sufficient detail; we also lay a lot of emphasis on evaluating the performance of all these models. A key objective of this course is help students build cutting-edge A.I. models that are ready for prime time, i.e., real-life applications. Fittingly, we work with several real-life datasets and case studies from banking and finance. We will work with three case studies, each of which span multiple sessions. -In the first case study, students use Machine Learning algorithms to understand how imbalanced datasets are handled in real-life. -In the second study, students use time series data and learn not only about the power of regularization techniques but also to highlight the prominence of A.I. in financial markets. -In the third case study, students learn how to use cutting-edge Deep Learning models to extract sentiments from disparate news sources; these are in turn used to generate trading strategies. By contrasting the effort that goes into and the payoff obtained from Machine Learning and Deep Learning models, students gain an intuitive appreciation of both these classes of models. Offered as BTEC 494 or FNCE 494. Prereq: For Master of Finance students only.
FTEC 493	Blockchains, Cryptocurrencies, and Cryptoventures	3 Units	It behooves today's business leaders to be well acquainted with blockchain technologies and AI, two seemingly disparate technologies that have the potential to fundamentally disrupt a wide range of businesses. The popularity of blockchain technologies has increased exponentially since the release of bitcoin in 2009. While bitcoins garnered a lot of attention during the initial days, the focus has shifted over time to the underlying technology: blockchain. This wildly innovative technology has made possible tasks that were hitherto deemed implausible: validate ownership in a digital asset, verify the true state of a transaction without relying on a costly intermediary etc. Accurate predictions and sound judgements are two critical ingredients of any decision making process. While the jury is still out on whether algorithms can make sound judgements, recent developments in a field called machine learning (and its sub-field, deep learning) have led to dramatic improvements in the accuracy of predictions made by these algorithms. Significantly, this gain in accuracy has been accompanied by a reduction in overall costs. These in turn have spurred the recent interest in AI. Organizations that have enabled AI at the enterprise level appear to be making more informed decisions and innovating new products. In this course, we will unpack these technologies and examine a wide range of relevant business use cases. Our objective is to provide a practical introduction to these key technologies and their business implications. We focus on business perspectives, rather than on the technical dimensions. Fittingly, this course is open to all graduate students of Weatherhead School (MBA and all specialty Masters). Students are not expected to have any specific programming background; however, a basic understanding of statistics is required to better appreciate the discourse on Artificial Intelligence.  Offered as BTEC 493, FNCE 493 and FTEC 493. Prereq: For Master of Science in FinTech students only.
FSAE 100	Academic English	3 Units	This course is designed to improve the fundamental reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills of students for whom English is not their first language.   One focus of the course will be refining written academic communication: identifying and producing common types of academic writing; note-taking from reading and listening inputs; understanding and applying principles of academic text structure; summarizing  and referencing information; editing and proofreading; and achieving appropriate tone and style. A second  focus will be honing spoken academic communication: recognizing the purposes of and differences between spoken and written English in academic contexts; identifying and practicing interactional and linguistic aspects of participation in seminar discussions; discussing issues requiring development and application of creative and critical thinking; and preparing and delivering oral presentations. A third focus will be on enhancing reading and listening skills in academic contexts: understanding the content and structure of information delivered both orally and in print form; and reading and listening for different purposes. A final focus will be improving and extending grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation.
FSCC 100	First Seminar	4 Units	This four credit-hour course provides an introduction to various dimensions of academic life. It will be characterized by intense yet open-ended intellectual inquiry, guided by reading from primary as well as secondary sources, and will include practice in written and oral communication in small groups. The goals are to enhance basic intellectual skills of academic inquiry, such as critical reading, thoughtful analysis, and written and oral communication; to introduce basic information literacy skills; to provide a foundation for ethical decision-making; to encourage a global and multidisciplinary perspective on the learning process; and to facilitate faculty-student interactions.
FSCC 110	Foundations of College Writing	4 Units	Writing is both a personal and a social project. Foundations of College Writing First Seminar provides attention to the personal aspects of writing including processes, habits, and skills as well as to the social aspects of writing including types of writing, persuasion/argument, and conventions. The course structure allows  us to spend more time and attention on your individual needs and goals as writers. You will learn academic writing conventions, rhetorical techniques, and various processes and methods that you might adopt and employ as you move into other writing situations.   We will explore writing from multiple positions: as a writer, as a reader, and as a critic. We will explore various types of writing: alphabetic text, visuals, and multimedia. And finally we will work to achieve the course objectives through freewriting, drafting, revising, reflecting, blogging, emailing, debating, and discussing.
FSCS 150	First Seminar Continuing Semester	3 Units	This is a continuation of the First Seminar experience for ESL students.  The seminar will continue the introduction to various dimensions of academic life.  It will be characterized by intense yet open-ended intellectual inquiry, guided by reading from primary as well as secondary sources, and will include practice in written and oral communication in small groups.  The goals of the seminar are to continue to enhance basic intellectual skills of academic inquiry, such as critical reading, thoughtful analysis, and written and oral communication; to continue to introduce basic information literacy skills; to continue to provide a foundation for ethical decision-making; to continue to encourage a global and multidisciplinary perspective on the learning process; and to continue to facilitate faculty-student interactions. Prereq: 100 level first year seminar in USFS, FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY,  or FSCS.  Prereq or Coreq: FSTS 100.
FSNA 103	Energy and Society	4 Units	This four-credit-hour course provides an introduction to collegiate writing and to various dimensions of academic life, but will focus on the critical appreciation of the world of energy.  Currently, most of the world runs on non-renewable resources; this course is designed to help students develop viewpoints about these issues, and to express themselves in a clear, coherent way.  The class will involve both literacy and numeracy, and students will learn to become comfortable handling some of the quantitative measures of energy use. The class will be characterized by intense yet open-ended intellectual inquiry, guided by reading, lectures and discussion, and will include practice in written and oral communication individually and in small groups.
FSNA 104	Archaeoastronomy: Monuments and Ideas	4 Units	The unifying theme of this course is how astronomical practice and knowledge is central to ancient civilizations and how that emphasis continues today as manifested through scientific endeavor and also as strongly through the power of unifying myth.
FSNA 111	Chemical Aspects of the Aging Mind	4 Units	This seminar will focus on three age-related neurological disorders: Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Huntington disease.  These diseases pose enormous social and economic impact, and current drug-based therapeutic approaches are limited and may not be suited to deal with the imminent problems.  The seminar will examine lifestyle changes (i.e., diet, exercise, vitamins, and other habits such as reading) that are implicated in preventing or slowing down these disorders.  The focus on a medical topic with important socioeconomic ramifications will provide a novel approach to enhancing critical thinking and communication skills.
FSNA 112	Talking Brains: The Neuroscience of Language	4 Units	J speaks both Italian and English. After suffering a stroke, he finds himself switching to Italian in the middle of a sentence, even when he knows the person he's talking to doesn't speak Italian! He can't stop himself no matter how hard he tries. In this discussion-based seminar, we'll use cases like J's to understand how a mass of cells can give rise to something as complicated as human language. We'll use primary source readings from neuroscience to study topics such as the typical organization of language in the brain, bilingualism, sign language, and problems with language resulting from brain injury.
FSNA 113	Facts and Values in Environmental Decisions	4 Units	This four-credit seminar will guide students to critically evaluate the evidence, uncertainties, and value judgments pertinent to some of the world's pressing environmental issues. We will begin by studying climate change. Students will decide the topics of exploration to follow. Through reading, field trips, discussions and writing we will investigate natural environmental processes and how they have changed with the growth in human population and technology. Students will learn about the scientific process and will consider the roll of science and technology and their limits in making decisions about shared resources.
FSNA 116	Cities (Under Construction)	4 Units	Based on the premise that cities are never "finished," and constantly being remade, we will look at the technological and cultural history of cities from the ancient world to the present day. Students will explore the history of building materials--wood, brick, steel, concrete, and glass--used in the construction of cities. We will also trace the development of city infrastructure such as water and sewage systems; streets, bridges, and subways; electricity, telephone and the internet. Specific technological innovations, such as the elevator and the automobile, will receive special consideration. We will move both geographically and temporally to visit the world's great cities, Athens, Mexico City, Tokyo, and New York City. As we do, we will study the examples of significant building projects, such as the Brooklyn Bridge, the Chicago World's Fair, Washington, DC's Metro, and Cleveland's first skyscraper, the Rockefeller Building. The course will cover the history of the professions--engineering, architecture, and urban planning--that have contributed to the construction of cities, and will review the works of these practitioners, as well as that of artists, reformers, and utopians that have imagined new directions for the city. We will also explore first person narratives of the city, the impact of the city on personal and collective memory, and the possibilities and pitfalls of the "virtual" city. Through lecture, discussion, textual analysis, computer simulations, and writing assignments, Cities (Under Construction) will help students gain a deeper understanding of their role in remaking and sustaining the built environment.
FSNA 120	The Impact of Materials on Societal Development	4 Units	This four credit-hour SAGES seminar provides an introduction to various dimensions of academic life through open-ended intellectual inquiry and guided by reading from primary and secondary sources.  The course will require practice in written and oral communications in small groups.  A primary focus of the seminar will be to examine the impact of engineering materials on societal development through human history using a few specific materials of interest as examples: concrete, steel, and semi-conductors.  At the conclusion of the course, students will be encouraged to explore the impact of other materials on the development of specific technologies as a group project.
FSNA 126	Urban Ecology	4 Units	This course will explore the natural world in an urban context.  Urban spaces are defined by the interaction between human creation (the built environment) and the natural world.  We will explore how those definitions can be complicated by human innovation meant to re-create nature, such as engineered wetlands.  We'll read some classical ecology to understand how ecological issues differ in cities.  Some topics we'll cover include: wildlife management; human/organism conflict and interdependence; urban heat islands; watershed, stormwater, and sewer management; and how trees grow in urban conditions.  We'll also explore ethical issues such as environmental justice and sustainable development.  Our field trips are meant to illuminate how urban planners, park managers, and others deal with such issues to create positive and healthy environments for their communities.  Students will apply arguments and concepts learned in the course readings to the sites we visit..
FSNA 129	Engineering Design to Alleviate Extreme Poverty	4 Units	Almost half (47%) of the people in Africa have incomes less than $1.25 per day. Most of these people live as subsistence farmers in small villages with no electricity, running water or automobiles (but with cell phones). Through readings, group discussions, writing assignments, and open-ended experiential learning activities, the course will address ways that engineering solutions can improve peoples' lives within these severe economic constraints. A hands-on component of the course will involve designing and building affordable devices to meet specific needs. We have developed interactions with villages in Senegal, Malawi, and Botswana, and the engineering solutions will be explored within the context of these villages.
FSNA 133	Engineering Innovation and Design	4 Units	Innovation and design are cornerstones of the engineering profession and are responsible for many of the improvements in the quality of life that have taken place over the last century. Innovation is also viewed as the essential skill that will drive economies and solve many of the challenges facing societies around the globe. This seminar-based course will provide a disciplined approach to engineering innovation and design. The course requires students to engage in written and oral communications as well as working in small teams to complete open-ended design/build-related assignments. The course will culminate in the design, fabrication and validation of a prototype product to meet an identified need. The design, fabrication and validation of these products will be carried out in think[box] 1.0 (Prentke-Romich Collaboratory), and the Reinberger Design Studio.
FSNA 134	Fuel Cells	4 Units	Fuel Cells convert hydrogen and other fuels directly to electricity and are viewed as a key technology for non-polluting, oil-independent energy in the future.  In this course, we will study and critically analyze the prospects, technical and economic barriers, and impact of broad implementation of fuel cells, focusing on the transportation sector and portable power.  Major topics of the course include: (i) World and US energy outlook; (ii) Potential role and impact of fuel-cells; their advantages, principles of operation, design and materials issues, limitations and prospects for improvements; (iii) Special focus on details of a polymer type fuel cells (PEMFCs) for transportation and portable power; (iv) Modeling fuel cell performance and evaluation of controlling mechanisms that limit performance.  The course is designed for students from all disciplines.  Students will be expected to read assigned texts and articles and critically analyze statements and points of view presented.  Quantitative analysis will be encouraged and developed.  Student teams will develop a hypothesis to improve fuel cell performance by modifying the design of a component of the fuel cell.  The new component design with then be fabricated and tested in an operating prototype fuel cell.  Data analysis, hypothesis conclusion, and reporting of results are expected.
FSNA 135	BioDesign Basics: The Art of Finding Patient Needs	4 Units	BioDesign basics explores the art of finding patient needs. No prior clinical or medical education is required, as we focus on acquiring and refining the underpinning critical thinking skills needed to identify and articulate unmet clinical patient needs in contemporary healthcare settings. Many--if not a majority of--ideas leading to healthcare innovation are derived from issues that arise during the daily activities of caring for patients. Whether it is frustration with the use of a specific surgical instrument, processes that interfere with health care delivery, better waiting rooms for the family, designing more comfortable hospital gowns, or materials inadequate for intended outcomes, patient needs cover a broad range of physical and emotional states. Many students find the idea of identifying a "patient need" quite ambiguous at first, but the BioDesign process for defining patient need is a widely use national model developed at Stanford University that the student will find contains easy-to-follow steps that are simple and appealing. As an interactive and "hands-on" course, students will be engaged in discussions, events and activities to promote a first-hand understanding of "needs finding" to support individual mastery of writing and oral presentation skills. The Fourth Hour will be centered on "walking tours" of local medical institutions around University Circle as well as actual use of medical devices (wheelchairs and crutches) on campus as ways to help your efforts identify a patient need based on those observations. In short, you will create your own experiences leading to stories that make writing fun. The course requires students to engage in written and oral communications as well as working in small teams to complete open-ended assignments.
FSNA 136	Saving the World from Poverty, Disease, Injustice and Environmental Exploitation	4 Units	Half of the world's population lives in poverty.  The causes of poverty and injustice are complex and the ramifications are numerous and serious and include grave risk to human health and to the environment.  Through reading, analysis, writing, and rigorous discussion the class will investigate issues surrounding poverty and disparities in health and opportunity.  We will also explore how innovation and engineering design can help address causes of poverty and disparity and meet needs of people at risk.  Design teams will work throughout the semester to identify an unmet need to engineer a solution to benefit an under-served or under-resourced population.  Fourth-hour activities will include interviewing knowledgeable stakeholders (locally and abroad via teleconference), learning about and volunteering with service organizations, and visiting local institutions and/or companies addressing these issues.
FSNA 144	Is Mind What the Brain Does?	4 Units	Together we will explore the nature of the human mind by asking the question, "Is the mind what the brain does?"  Through an exploration of neurological and psychological case studies, empirical research studies, direct experimentation, and readings and films about brain structure and function, we will form hypotheses about the relationship between the mind and the brain and gather evidence to test our hypotheses.  Writing assignments will explore ideas about your own mind and brain, examples of other individuals with unusual or atypical brains and minds, and a research topic of your choice.
FSNA 150	Hobbies - Engineering fun	4 Units	This seminar introduces students to the idea that engineering can be found in all sorts of unexpected places, even in our hobbies.  To test our hypothesis, we will examine the hobbies enjoyed by the course instructors:  baseball and building synthetic coral reef aquariums.  Students will then work under the instructors' guidance to analyze how principles of engineering can be used to understand the successes and failures they have encountered in their own hobbies, with the ultimate goal of developing a proposal for improving their experience of these hobbies.
FSNA 154	The Green Energy Transformation in Germany	4 Units	This seminar introduces students to the development and successes of green technologies in Germany.  We will examine the proactive development of renewable energy and energy conservation technologies, commonly referred to as Energiewende, that was started by the German Green movement and promoted by Germany's innovative renewable energy policies.  We will consider such questions as: What are the implications of this German success story, both for the US and the rest of the world?  What lessons can be applied to other situations?  What factors might limit the utility of those lessons?  In the process of our investigation, we will examine such important issues as globalization, resource finiteness, and sustainability challenges, including economic crises, climate change, energy insecurity, and global competition.
FSNA 157	Plastics Recycling: Re-use of Plastic Waste	4 Units	About 300 million tons of plastics are produced globally each year, but only about 10 percent of these products are recycled, despite the fact that recycling uses significantly less energy and produces fewer greenhouse gas emissions than does manufacture of the virgin materials. This course will address the scientific, economic, environmental, and political issues involved in plastics recycling. Following an introduction to the chemical structures and properties of commodity plastics, we will discuss the actual recycling of plastics in municipal waste including the problems faced in collection and sorting of plastic waste and recycling economics. Then we will address the commercial applications and properties of recycled plastics and why they generally have inferior properties to virgin materials, which significantly reduces their market value. Finally we will look at biodegradable alternatives to oil-based materials as  well as some options to plastics recycling, including land filling, burning for power generation, and monomer reclamation.
FSNA 158	What is Making and Manufacturing Today and Why is Innovation Part of the Story?	4 Units	The rise of the creative class into the world of "making" has resulted in new economic models, new definitions of manufacturing, and new ways of working.  "Making" is inclusive of a wide variety of activities, from the arts and crafts, to woodworking, to high technology integrating with traditional craftsmanship, to products with embedded sensors in traditional materials, to the use of 3D printing of everything from polymers to metals to chocolate. Within all of these approaches, "innovation" is often the buzzword, the common denominator.  What does innovation mean in this context?  Are innovators and makers today any different from the innovators and manufacturers of the past?  What role does science and math have in making and manufacturing?  Through both a hands-on and historical approach, we will explore the commonalities between today's makers and yesterday's manufacturers, and arrive at an understanding of innovation and apply this understanding to a project that could continue throughout your time at CWRU.
FSNA 159	Nanotechnology in Medicine: The Fantastic Voyage	4 Units	This seminar is designed to introduce students to Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, their application in the world of biomedicine, and the fundamental science and engineering principles that guide the current state-of-art and future approaches. The course will begin with an introduction to the history, science and terminology of `Nano scale', `Nanotechnology' and `Nanomedicine'. It will then focus on the historical advancements in the field and describe why and how the field became an exciting component of medical technologies. The course will draw on a variety of texts including book sections, newspaper articles, editorials, scientific journal  articles and internet-sourced information to understand the realm of nanoscience and nanotechnology in various STEM areas and their specific application in biomedicine. The course will also correlate science fiction with reality, pertaining to the Nanomedicine area, via two classic movies: Fantastic Voyage (1966) and Inner Space (1987). The students will be asked to interpret components/sections of the movies in terms of `conceptual correctness', `scientific correctness' and `challenges in nanomedicine'.
FSNA 160	Technological Development and Popular Perception	4 Units	The central theme of this seminar is the basic functioning of engineered devices and systems.  The devices/systems covered will be 1) automobiles, 2) airplanes, and 3) production of electric power.  Material for the seminar will come from a wide range of sources, including a reference book "How Things Work", historical references, popular pseudo-technical periodicals, and technical journal articles.  We will discuss topics ranging from a) how to characterize the basic physical principles at work in the devices/systems to z) how popular opinion can affect the adoption or abandonment of sound technology.
FSNA 162	The Root of All Technology: Natural and Synthetic Materials	4 Units	We all rely on technologies such as smartphones, wireless and wired communication, and embedded electronics. But access to these technologies depends on the availability and affordability of the materials used to make them. Rapid technological development and sustainability concerns have created novel demands on the infrastructure that extracts raw materials and converts them into useful devices. As a result, new classes of materials offering unique properties have been developed. This seminar examines the development and life cycle of materials. Key to our analysis will be a framework for understanding materials flow, including the prospect of closed loop production. Topics will include: patterns in raw material extraction around the world, including the north-south divide; shifts in socioeconomic drivers underlying shifts in demand for materials; material properties needed for today¹s technologies; methods for predicting demand for materials and constraints of meeting that demand.
FSNA 163	Design Thinking: Influence of Art and Engineering on Design	4 Units	For designers, the "wicked problem" is the recognition that decision-making is full of contingencies, including multiple perspectives and approaches, and while problems may be solved, elegant solutions are rarely without faults. This course investigates how these contingencies affect the design process in art and engineering, ultimately looking at the overlap between these two disciplines. What are the differences between artistic and engineering approaches to design? How can a hybrid approach that integrates aspects from each discipline solve persistent design challenges? Working with students from the Cleveland Institute of Art (CIA) in a seminar-studio setting, students will experience first-hand the importance of disciplinary diversity and innovative thinking in the design process. Collaboratively and individually, students will reveal and explore ways of design thinking shared by art and engineering in written, digital, and fabricated assignments.
FSNA 165	Silicon and Its Applications	4 Units	Silicon is the second most abundant element found on the planet. Over the last century, science has taught us to take this common material and create the products on which our modern society depends. Quantum mechanics gave birth to the electronic age and the computer. The absorption, emission and reflection of quanta of light (photons) underlie solar cells, light emitting diodes, radiation detectors, and optical fibers. The driving forces behind these discoveries are fascinating. The history of the scientific revolution--the conversion of sand into silicon ingots then into computer chips--is extraordinary. The advancement of computer chips and accessories based on silicon technology now enables your smartphone to direct you to the nearest Taco Bell through its connection to a satellite orbiting the Earth. There are basic processing steps that change an ingot of pure silicon into a practical device such as a chemical sensor or a solar cell.  Major topics of this course will include discussion of the history of silicon, from the simple transistor to complex microprocessor, solar cells, and sensors, as well as how the swift changes in computing power and the communications revolution powered by it have impacted our daily modern life.  Excellent examples of this silicon-based technology include the use of silicon in solar panels and their place in the green energy revolution, and the expanding role of silicon microsensors as one of the fastest growing areas of technology, especially in the area of biochips for healthcare. Students in this class will have the opportunity to design and construct a simple device on a silicon chip for their group project.  This course is designed and intended for students of all disciplines, and each student is expected to participate actively in a group project to make a silicon device in a clean room. Students will participate in a laboratory experience where chemicals and reagents will be used for typical silicon technology processing.  During Fourth Hour, students will have the chance to visit the University Solar Farm, laboratories at CWRU that are actively involved in silicon research, listen to guest speakers whose research involve silicon, watch films on usage of silicon technology and master oral presentation skills.
FSNA 168	Exploring the Ocean	4 Units	Most of our planet is ocean: beautiful, powerful, mysterious, deadly. Why do we risk going to sea? How did people begin to explore the ocean, and how do we explore today? What have we learned, what can we learn, and what questions about the ocean must remain unanswered? In this course we will read scholarly and popular narratives of ocean exploration; learn how sailors found their way at sea, centuries before satellite  navigation; consider what it takes to equip a voyage, then and now; and learn about the instruments and submarines that let us probe the ocean depths, and what we find there.
FSNA 173	Biology in Translation: From the Lab to Our Lives	4 Units	Biological research informs many of our everyday decisions. Notably, we relied on biologists to learn about the spread of COVID-19 and what actions might reduce our risk of infection, often without having access to or the technical expertise to understand the original research. Instead, we relied on science journalists and science communicators to translate this research for us. Science communication at its best empowers people and communities to make informed decisions. At its worst, it perpetuates misleading information. What is the role of science communicators in making science accessible? What questions do they ask? How do they transform technical information into engaging narratives? How do they acknowledge the social, political, and economic forces acting on the scientific process? In this course, we will study the articles that scientists write for each other and the popular articles, podcasts, blogs, and documentaries that science communicators compose for a broader audience. In the last unit, you'll be writing your own feature-length science essay that addresses, contextualizes, and responds to an independently chosen question grounded in the biological sciences.
FSSO 119	Philanthropy in America	4 Units	This four-credit course provides an introduction to various dimensions of philanthropy and volunteerism.  Using the seminar format and an array of interactive activities, we will conduct a broad but intellectual inquiry into the systems and ethics of giving time and money to charitable causes.  In four units of inquiry, we will consider the giving traditions that have influenced American culture and society since its colonial days.  We will examine the role that the Third Sector (also known as the Independent or Nonprofit Sector) plays as an agent of social change in a functioning democratic republic.  We will explore the nature of donors and volunteers and take a critical look at the missions and goals of a cross section of nonprofit organizations.  We will wrestle with ethical issues related to philanthropy and consider the giving patterns of different social, religious, and ethnic groups.  We will also turn our collective thinking to how the nonprofit sector might better serve the social needs of the nation and the world.  At the end of the semester, we will reflect on how our ideas about philanthropy have changed over the course of fifteen weeks.
FSSO 120	Poverty and Social Policy	4 Units	This course has two major foci: poverty and social policies designed to ameliorate poverty. Sociologists in the United States and in other countries have made major contributions to studies of poverty. They have primarily focused on income-based poverty, but more recently, have also studied other forms of poverty. In this class, we will examine different conceptualizations and measures of poverty. We will then examine short-term and long-term poverty experiences and their potential consequences. We will then turn to explanations of poverty: why are some individuals more likely  to experience periods of low income than others? While the United States will be the focus of the course, we will contrast the experiences of other countries. The second component will be an analysis of social policies designed to ameliorate poverty. In particular, we will examine the development and retrenchment of welfare states and other social policies, the various goals of social policy, and the different impacts social policies have had on individuals, families, other groups, and the country overall. This discussion will reflect on experiences of other countries.
FSSO 128	Movers and Shakers: Leadership	4 Units	"Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can change the world.  Indeed, it is the only thing that ever has" (Margaret Mead, 1901-1978).  This seminar is about understanding what enables people to make a generative impact on the world.  Students will explore the socio-emotional and motivational characteristics of effective leaders and their ability to create positive change.  Students will also be encouraged to develop their own theories of leadership and to explore their personal approaches to making a difference.  The seminar will profile leaders from different occupations and walks of life.  Seminar sessions will feature assigned readings on leaders and change agents, class discussion on what drives movers and shakers, and individual and group presentations on class members' emergent leadership perspectives.  A key objective of the seminar is the development of critical thinking skills, writing skills, and verbal skills.  Consequently, the weekly class readings, reflection papers on class readings, class discussions, class presentations (individual and group), and final project are vital features of the seminar experience.  Students will be expected to leave the seminar with a grounded perspective on leaders and leadership, and the ability to articulate their own personal views on making a difference in the world.
FSSO 129	Perspectives on Inequality	4 Units	We live in a world in which millions of people die every year in developing countries due to poverty-related conditions.  Within the United States, where most commentators characterize the population as "middle class," at least 35 million people live in poverty.  This course examines social inequality from multiple perspectives.  We will discuss the concepts of poverty, discrimination, and social change on a global and national level.  The first third of the course assesses several economic, cultural, and environmental theories of inequality.  We will then survey a wide range of scholarship that has addressed various types of social inequalities from diverse viewpoints.
FSSO 143	Living With and Making Decisions Concerning Injustice	4 Units	Injustice. What do you think of when you hear that word? There are all types of injustice in this world, and chances are that during our lifetime we will either find ourselves in a position or system of power, perpetrating injustice on others; or in a position or system of supposed impotence, a subject of injustice. What are our choices? How will we respond? In this course we will examine the topic of living with and making decisions concerning injustice using, as an example, the specific injustice of slavery, examining the lives and decisions of both a famous slaveholder and two not-so-famous slaves; and learning from their lives and decisions how we might, ourselves, live with and make decisions concerning injustices we face in our lives.
FSSO 145	Berlin in History, History in Berlin	4 Units	From its emergence as a fishing village in the sandy marshes of the eastern frontier of Germany, to its 21st-century role as a cosmopolitan metropolis, Berlin has embodied the arc of change over time in human society. This course uses the history of the city of Berlin as the lens through which to contemplate the complexity of human social and cultural arrangements, their expression in economics and politics (including war), and the imbrication of human cultural and social constructions with the "natural" world.  We will read books and articles about the history, culture, economy, and politics of Berlin, primarily from its establishment as the capital of new German Empire in 1871 to the present. We will view films that introduce us to the manic energy that Berlin represented in the transition to modernity. We will visit local museums that house examples of the material culture of Berlin, from the Cleveland Museum of Art to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum. We will listen to the music of Berlin, from the baroque of the Brandenburg Concertos to the heavy metal of the Skorpions. And we will learn its history, from fishing village, to court city, to imperial metropolis and industrial engine, to divided symbol of the Cold War, to de-industrialized center of art, government, education, and incubator of high-technology.  This First Seminar will prepare students to pursue their undergraduate degrees grounded in thinking about places in time, about change over time, and about human creativity, while preparing them to write and speak about their arguments with clarity and grace.
FSSO 146	The Past and Future of Art, Architecture and Museums in Cleveland	4 Units	During the gilded age, Cleveland became one of this country's most powerful centers of business, industry, and political power.  For example, John D. Rockefeller, who started his business career in Cleveland, became the wealthiest individual in human history, and Mark Hanna, the leader of Cleveland's Republican political machine, selected and engineered the election of eight Ohio-born Presidents of the United States, setting a state record which is still unbroken.  As late as the 1930s, Henry Luce located the headquarters of Time, Life and Fortune magazines in Cleveland; and the Terminal Tower, the nexus of the vast, sprawling railroad and real-estate Empire of the Van Sweringen Brothers, was the country's highest building outside of New York.  This class will examine one of the by-products of this accumulation of power and money: the flowering of art and culture in Cleveland during the early 20th century, and the creation of notable cultural institutions, such as one of this country's finest symphony orchestras, one of its top ten art museums, a major university, and an array of other notable entities, many of them housed in buildings of architectural distinction.  The class will also examine the economic, cultural and intellectual decline of Cleveland in the second half of the 20th century, and recent attempts to reverse this trend through intensive efforts to revitalize University Circle.  In addition to classroom sessions, the course will include field trips to the Cleveland Museum of Art, the Western Reserve Historical Society, and the Museum of Contemporary Art, and an architectural tour of downtown Cleveland.  The class will be centered on three interrelated questions: What makes a great city?  How can the artistic and cultural life of a great city be developed and sustained?  How can the social and economic collapse of a great city be reversed?
FSSO 149	Creativity in the Arts, Sciences, and Engineering	4 Units	This seminar will have a focus on creativity in the arts, sciences, and engineering.  What are the similarities and differences in the creative process in these three different broad fields?  How are the creative products different?  What are the creative processes involved in these different domains.  Are there differences in personalities between scientists and artists?  How can we foster creativity in children and adults in these fields?  We all read about and discuss the different dimensions of creativity; what makes something creative; what helps people become creative; the role of cognition and emotion in the creative process in the arts and sciences; and mental illness and creativity.
FSSO 152	Decision Making in Everyday Life	4 Units	Although social cognition allows us to process vast amounts of information quickly, we are not always aware of the subtle forces that guide our decision making.  This course will use a seminar approach to explore rational and irrational forces that influence decision making.  We will use a multi-disciplinary approach to decision making, including topics such as personality factors, incentive-based decision making, cognitive biases, automatic information processing, and theories of mind.  These topics will be explored using class discussion, writings, and student presentations.
FSSO 153	Reading Social Justice: The Anisfield-Wolf Book Awards	4 Units	In this seminar, we will read a selection of poetry, short stories and books and use them as a framework to explore questions related to understanding tolerance, social justice and diversity.  We will begin by establishing a definition of and methodology for addressing these issues in our discussion and writing, and build upon them as the semester progresses.  Much of the fiction and nonfiction we will read will be by winners of the Anisfield-Wolf Book Awards.  In addition to our reading, we will also analyze and discuss a selection of films, art works and music related to our theme.  Our Fourth Hour experiences will include attending the Awards ceremony in September, visits to cultural institutions within University Circle, lectures and guest speakers.  While the primary goal of the class is to help students develop their critical thinking and writing skills, it is also intended to introduce them to a vital, Cleveland-based literary institution.  By engaging the themes, texts, and authors of Anisfield-Wolf, students will have a deeper understanding not only of contemporary literature, but the importance of social justice to a liberal arts education.
FSSO 157	Being in Touch: Animal and Human Considerations	4 Units	This is a seminar designed to refine skills of critical thinking and reading, listening, learning. writing and verbal presentation while considering the topic of touch.  We will consider touch in different situations and for different purposes - touch in child development, touch in socialization, therapeutic animal touch, touch and violence/harassment, touch in the workplace, touch and technology, taste as a function of touch, healing touch comforting and noxious touch, and things we are afraid to touch.
FSSO 164	Social Change, Genes, and Environment	4 Units	This seminar will focus on the rapidly expanding understanding of the interaction of biological and social forces--including the interaction of genes and environment.  We will explore claims that are made in science and popular culture about the role of genes in development.  We will focus on the role that social forces play in shaping the effects of genes in development, and health, through epigenetics and related mechanisms.  Adopting a sociology-of-science perspective, we will consider the wider and future implications of gene-environment interactions for politics, the economy, and culture.
FSSO 165	Identities and Social Inequality	4 Units	In this course, students examine diversity, privilege, and power in US society. Social categories such as gender, heritage, language, race, religion, and sexuality affect the status of both individuals and groups, at times producing unequal distribution of resources and marginalization. No group or individual belongs to one category; therefore, we will also consider how the intersection of these categories produces their own unique effects. Students are expected to analyze and critique social institutions, belief systems, and practices that promote inequality and social justice through data- based dialogue and writing. Modes of inquiry will include quantitative and qualitative research methods and current scholarly literature. This course is conducted in a seminar format that requires students to engage in active, relevant and insightful discussions regarding the course content. Students have the opportunity to hear from guest experts in the field and participate in off-campus learning activities. Reflective and scholarly writing are major components of the course.
FSSO 169	The History of Your Lifetime: Making Sense of the Last Twenty Years	4 Units	No matter when you grow up, adults make assumptions about what you know, "You lived through certain events, didn't you? Those events are often very important--the basis of political and policy debates or related to subjects that affect daily life--but it's often difficult to make sense of history you've lived through, but only as children. The usual way we learn about the past--in history classes--isn't very helpful because this is a time period that usually goes beyond what your teachers have been able to cover.  Even if you could have covered this recent time period in history class, unfortunately, most recent subjects haven't received much attention from historians; the archives aren't yet available and we lack much critical distance in making judgments about what is significant and what isn't. We aren't yet sure which assumed causes of historical change are plausible and which only seemed so at the time. This time period usually constitutes most of the student's lifetime--your lifetime.  This class takes these challenges head-on, examining the last 20 years of history. Aside from covering the "what happened" for several selected topics, we will attempt to go further and explore how historians think about contemporary events, place current events into longer historical contexts, develop skills in media literacy to better evaluate the quality of information we receive, and discuss the uses and misuses of historical analogies in public debate. We will also investigate the importance of structural narrative in making sense of historical events and processes: what questions do we ask of the past and why those questions and not others? Why do our questions about the past change over time? How do present circumstances affect our historical work? When do we draw our chronological boundaries; when do our stories start and when do they end?
FSSO 171	Prediction	4 Units	This course is an interdisciplinary examination of predictions about social events, how we make them, why they go wrong, and how we respond. While some things, like election results, are easy to predict, dramatic events like wars, depressions, and stock market crashes are harder to predict. The course will begin with the basic elements of probability theory to lay the groundwork for the class. Then, we will examine the psychological research on the types of errors people are prone to make regarding probability and the consequences of such biases in perception and estimation. The course will then move on to discuss predicting specific social events, such as elections and stock trends, comparing the empirical research to conventional beliefs. Then the course will address the role of scholarly research more generally, and the empirical work discussing how political scientists, economists, and other scholars often fail to predict the most significant and dramatic events because of their cognitive styles, which vary in the degree to which they rely on simplified models. Finally, the course will discuss how people respond when their predictions go wrong, and their basic tendency to rationalize away errors.
FSSO 172	Islam in South Asia	4 Units	There are more Muslims in South Asia than in any other region of the world. But within the region, Islam is far from a monolith. What variety of religious practices and traditions of debate have characterized South Asian Muslims? When meshed with different political projects, how do we understand Islam as a deeply contested ideological field? What roles did Muslims play in the history of South Asia? These are some of the questions we will pursue in the seminar.   The long history of Muslim presence in the region--which now includes India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Afghanistan--will offer opportunities for studying them in a wide range of historical contexts: as actors in cosmopolitan, commercial networks of trade; as rulers consolidating states and empires governing large multi-ethnic and multi-religious populations; as "modernizers" and "traditionalists;" as religious minorities and majorities in different nation-states. Additionally, this seminar will explore Islam in an array of modern settings: from a nation-state created as a "Muslim homeland" to a rejection of religion as an adequate basis of national identity; from democracy to military rule; and, from Cold War politics to the "Global War on Terror."
FSSO 176	SAVOR	The Ethics and Politics of Eating	4 Units	Our food choices affect more than our individual health; what we decide to put into our bodies has important consequences for our environment, the livelihood of farmers, and even the general well-being of a society.  These choices also reveal moral, cultural, and religious values we deem important. In this seminar, we will examine the environmental and social consequences of our food choices by interrogating both our individual habits as well as current (often controversial) food policy issues. In line with the requirements of a SAGES First Seminar, this course is designed to improve students' ability to read critically and interpret moral and political arguments. We will analyze a wide range of writings on food-related issues in order to develop sophisticated perspectives on our food choices. Hopefully, this thoughtful consideration will translate to mindful habits when we convene around food with our friends, families, and communities. Class discussions will be accompanied by class visits to urban gardens, restaurants with a sustainability mission, and farmers' markets. We'll also meet representatives of community organizations like the Greater Cleveland Food Bank.
FSSO 178	Crafting Your Own Freedom	4 Units	An abiding task of ancient philosophy was to style your life with wisdom.  The Greek and Roman schools of philosophy so common to cities around the Mediterranean two thousand years ago developed all sorts of techniques for people to become self-styled sages-in-training.  The modern variant, as Michael Foucault and his student Jacques Rancière noted, was to transpose wisdom into a critical attitude where the goal of style was not sagacity but liberation.  In this course, we work as in a lab -a modern philosophical workplace- to style your lives critically, articulating stratagems and ideals of liberation.  In particular, we focus on becoming a multi-dimensional human, on finding time and space in the midst of work for utopian dreams, on loving relationships, and on education as a developmental experience.
FSSO 180	The Tobacco Wars	4 Units	If smoking cigarettes is as deadly as the experts say, why does anyone do it?  If reducing cigarette consumption is a vital public health goal, does the fact that the rate of smoking by U.S. adults has fallen by two thirds over the past 50 years mean policies have been a great success, or does the Center for Disease Control and Prevention's estimate that about 480,000 Americans suffered premature deaths in 2009 that could be attributed to smoking mean policies have been at best inadequate?  Why did the political winds turn against tobacco use and sale in the 1990s?  And why do both public health advocates and tobacco companies want to restrict vaping?  Those are among the questions we will investigate in this course.  It will call on perspectives from, among others, the fields of public health, political science, sociology, and economics.  We will begin with readings about the research on tobacco's physiological effects.  Next we will consider tobacco's attractions--both for individual consumption and as a shared activity.  The third section of the course will ask what policies to reduce consumption work, how well, and why.  We will then focus on the dramatic political battles of the 1990s.  What happened and why?  There are many different answers, and that makes the story even more interesting.  The final section of the course will focus on current policies and politics, ending with the controversies over e-cigarettes.  Why were e-cigarettes included in CWRU's new anti-smoking policy, and should they have been?
FSSO 181	Bicycles: Technology and Everyday Life	4 Units	For most of us, the bicycle seems a simple, everyday object, perhaps associated with children's toys or recreational sport. But deeper analysis reveals that the technology of the bicycle has developed in distinct social contexts, and that aspects of its development are closely intertwined with community values. In this seminar, we will trace the history of bicycles in these technological and social contexts. We will note, for example, the importance of bicycles for the feminist movement of the 1890s and beyond. We will also consider cycling in our present environment, paying attention to debates about urban infrastructure as it pertains to cars, bicycles, and pedestrians.   We will engage with popular and scholarly sources, and we will consider the significance of bicycles even for non-cyclists. Topics may include the physics and engineering of bicycle design, the aesthetic aspects of the cycling experience, the role of bicycles in our transportation infrastructure, and the varying perceptions of cycling in cultures throughout the world. We will critically examine claims that increased bicycle use can lead to better energy efficiency, less traffic, improved health, better quality of life, and more fun. Fourth-hour classes will include connections with community cycling organizations, such as Case Cycling and bike advocacy nonprofits. Students will write formal critical essays, exploring topics from readings and discussion in greater depth.  Students need not possess any cycling experience to take this class--only an interest in questions of how technology interacts with social values, and how these values are expressed in our everyday lives. We will use Cleveland and University Circle as a laboratory for understanding the complexity and challenges of managing city infrastructure for different kinds of users. Optional group rides if interest exists.
FSSO 182	Burning River to City Farms	Transitional Urban Environments	4 Units	How does one live sustainably in an urban setting? This emerges as a vital 21st century question, especially since more than 70% of contemporary Americans live in or near densely populated cities. This seminar examines how people in urban geographies forge meaningful relations with the natural world. Cleveland, a city undergoing cultural and economic redefinition, stands as an ideal place to engage the work of contemporary environmental writers, filmmakers, urban planners, and community organizers. While our field experiences will ground us in environmental transitions taking place in Cleveland, we will consider how similar dynamics play out in other Midwestern cities as well as further-flung locales, such as Havana, Toronto, New Orleans, Oakland, Los Angeles, and Boston.  This seminar's driving questions include:  How have people in urban setting--across lines of social class and ethnicity--forged meaningful relationships with the natural world? How do global histories, carried through immigration and refugee resettlement, affect the ways that current communities interact with urban nature? How might privilege and power factor into the greening of blighted city spaces, through practices such as urban farming, ecological restoration, and community revitalization? Our exploration of these questions will help you form a better understanding of what it means to live mindfully at the intersection of nature and culture.
FSSO 184	Handmaking in the Age of the Machine	4 Units	Our seminar will focus on what counts as hand-made in our society, whose hands do the making, and why this making continues to matter. In order to understand that type of making, we'll investigate the relationship between industry and handicraft, the machine and the human, the mechanically reproduced and the precious original--all expressions of relations among technology, individual bodies, and the imagination. Since the Industrial Revolution, our society has increasingly mechanized its operations to ensure efficient production involving fewer skilled workers. Opposition to industrialization has existed since the earliest moments of the Revolution, expressed both violently by the followers of the mythical Ned Ludd and thoughtfully by people such as Victorian craftsman and philosopher William Morris, who argued for a return to human ingenuity and "handicraft." Today, craft movements supported by Etsy.com and DIY TV shows like Project Runway continue to inspire ingenuity in both machine and handicraft. To investigate these ideas, we will read texts from philosophers, industrialists, and craftspeople concerned with mass production, experience making things by hand, and travel to local museums and maker-spaces. Among other creative activities, we will use CWRU's letterpress, make books, learn how to knit, and explore think[box]. Students will pursue a handmade project of their choice.
FSSO 185A	Adulting: Coming of Age in the 21st Century	4 Units	This course will explore what it means to grow up today. In industrialized countries 50 years ago, a 22-year-old was married, had at least one child, and was perhaps on the way to owning a home. For the current generation, however, traditional markers of adulthood--leaving home, completing school, becoming financially independent, getting married, and having children--have become increasingly delayed, disordered, or even foregone, both in the US and worldwide. To better understand this shift, we will investigate the changing economic, social, and cultural forces underlying it. We will pay particular attention to the ways in which race, class, gender, and sexuality shape young people's experiences of, and pathways to, adulthood.
FSSO 185C	Music and Cultural Anxiety in the 20th Century	4 Units	The Paris premiere in May 1913 of Igor Stravinsky's ballet, The Rite of Spring, provoked one of the most infamous crowd reactions in Western music history. The "primitive" choreography and brutally dissonant music scandalized the more conservative attendees, whose protests drowned out the orchestra and threw the dancers into confusion. To its detractors, The Rite of Spring not only threatened the polite domain of classical ballet, it confirmed a view that serious music had gone off the rails and was hastening Europe's moral and spiritual decline. But The Rite of Spring was also a new beginning, labeled by one prominent historian "the defining moment of Modernism not just in music, but in all the arts." In this course, Stravinsky's ballet will provide a starting point for examining cultural anxieties provoked by once-new music, especially with regard to questions of how music relates to identity (social, political, economic, racial/ethnic, sexual, gender). What role does music play in forming, signaling, or challenging popular values or beliefs? What factors explain strong ethical reactions to different kinds of music? How do particular genres tend to reflect social or political status, how are cultural taboos broken through music, and in what ethical terms has musical progress historically been defined? How do we reconcile music we might like with offensive views that its creators might have held? From the early twentieth-century Modernist era, we will proceed to two other disruptive historical moments: the rise of Hitler's Third Reich and its impact on German music and musicians; and the emergence of rock-n-roll in the 1950s and 60s, which enflamed anxieties about racial, sexual, and generational difference, and provided a soundtrack for unprecedented social upheaval. Seminar discussions will be based on readings and videos that are accessible to non-musicians, and we will also take extracurricular advantage of the Cleveland Museum of Art, the Cleveland Orchestra, and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum. Students will help lead class discussions and will write short essays that can be related in unlimited ways to present-day concerns, whether individual or social.
FSSO 185D	Beyond Words	Language, Culture & Society	4 Units	Language and communication permeate all aspects of  our experience from facial expressions and body language to texting and social media. In this seminar we will engage in the academic and experiential exploration of human languages and communication in connection to a wide range of social practices and cultural meanings. In addition to studying how languages shape human thought, we will investigate linguistic diversity and change both within and across societies and cultures. We will also examine how one's position in a society with respect to gender, race, ethnicity, class, and age among other dimensions can affect one's use of language. Over the course of the semester we will learn and apply key concepts, approaches and methods through the discussion of a variety of cases studies and examples. We will also discussed what it takes to achieve linguistic and cultural competency in multicultural settings and situations including various institutions and professional fields.
FSSO 185E	Case Studies in Public Health	4 Units	What are the markers of a "healthy" society, and who decides? What should be the government's role in preserving and protecting our bodies, minds, and communities? Does collective welfare trump the rights of the individual? How the state responds to an ailing citizenry tells us a lot about both how it understands health and whose health it deems valuable. This course uses three case studies from U.S. history to illustrate the principles and the practical realities of public-health crisis management. For their final project, students will research a case study of their own choosing and present it as a podcast.
FSSO 185J	Democracy vs Populism in the 21st Century	4 Units	A worrying trend seems afoot.  Recent studies indicate a persistent global pattern: declining support for representative democratic institutions. This fall is starkest among people under the age of 30.  Only a third of individuals in this age group believe it is important to live in a democracy.  Generally, there appears a marked preference for forms of direct democracy such as referenda or for rule by figures not associated with traditional forms of democratic government such as military or business leaders.  Populism--whether on the political right or left--has grown in support across the globe since the 2008 financial crisis.  Twenty-first century populism aims to prevent a so-called corrupt elite from thwarting the will of the people.  Populists can express inclusive democratic ideals, but can just as easily build a majority by discriminating on the basis of race, gender, sexuality, religion, class, or immigration.  Recent political movements in the UK and USA, for example, reflect populist sentiment, while the rise of authoritarianism in Hungary, Russia, and Turkey also depends upon populist appeal.  This course considers the implication of these events for democracy.  We will ask whether democracy really is in crisis or whether the current uncertainty is a foreseeable consequence of cultural, economic, and social change.
FSSO 185L	What is College For?	4 Units	Why are we here? Not on this planet--that's another course--but here, at this university? What is the purpose of a university? What do we--as students, as faculty, as different communities-- expect of such an institution? And what should those institutions expect from us? In this course we will explore historical and contemporary ideas of the university, and in our seminar discussions we will measure our own experiences against that history and those theories. We will place particular emphasis on the current state of the idea of the university, and the subsequent effects of those ideas on current university students. We will ask, for example, how cultural and societal notions of the university's purpose affect our expectations for our own time and work there. How and why do debates about the university present a stage for some of our most contentious societal questions? We will acquaint ourselves with the histories and contexts of some of these debates in order to address the complexities of our present moment. We will take up this debate ourselves in our daily seminar conversations, and we will explore them further in Fourth Hour field trips around our university and others in the Cleveland area. We will write and think in a variety of genres, including personal essays, critical analyses, and individual and group oral presentations.
FSSO 185N	Religion in the City: Skyscapers, Hip-Hop, and Urban Spirituality	4 Units	I'll bet that "religion" isn't the first word that comes to mind when you think of LeBron James, Cardi B, Kim Kardashian, or Kanye West. And yet these icons of pop culture embody an urban spirituality infused with elements from American evangelicalism, modern capitalism, and the Latinx and African diasporas.    This course examines the social and spiritual reconfigurations that have accompanied globalization and  urbanization in the 20th- and 21st-Century United States.  Our focus is on the dynamic relationship between faith and place, and especially the ways that migration and urban development have reshaped the American religious landscape.   The class is divided into three thematic areas, each of which is accompanied by a corresponding textbook and culminates in a graded writing assignment. (i) We will begin the class with a quick overview of contemporary American religious history, paying specific attention to several religious and cultural institutions in Cleveland. (ii) Equipped with these local case studies, we will zoom out, historically, to consider broader trends in other periods and regions of the United States. (iii) To conclude the semester, we will bring these anthropological and historical backdrops to bear on the role of urban religion in contemporary hip-hop, basketball, and political discourse.
FSSO 185O	Illusions and Confusions	The Cognitive Science of Mistakes	4 Units	Much of what we know about how minds work comes from observations about the kinds of mistakes we make. Perceptual illusions reveal things about how our brains process sensory information. Magic tricks teach us about the nature of attention. These sorts of illusions raise questions about why and how we become confused. Why do puzzles seem easier when we know the answer? Why do rare events often seem scarier than everyday dangers? Why is it harder to say whether a word is red or green when that word is YELLOW than when it is BUCKET?  In this course we will explore these effects and others to learn not only about cognition but also about the practice of cognitive science--how we can study questions about the human mind by finding and testing this kind of evidence. We will read about famous conceptual and perceptual illusions and confusions; we will learn how to demonstrate them and try them for ourselves; and we will practice describing and discussing these effects in writing and in short formal presentations. Finally, we will also explore how you can learn most effectively from your own mistakes, both as you study and in your creative life.
FSSO 185P	Caskets and Corpses: The American Funeral Industry	4 Units	What do you want to happen to your body when you die? In the United States, you can be embalmed and buried in a public cemetery, donated to science, or composted. If you prefer cremation, your ashes can be placed in an urn, added to a coral reef, or pressed into a diamond. Despite this seemingly endless array of options, however, the vast majority of corpses in America have one thing in common: they are processed through the funeral industry, which generates $16 billion a year in revenue. But this is a rather modern development: it was not until the late 1800s that the funeral industry started to replace traditional forms of death care, in which families prepared the body at home before burial in the local churchyard. How and why did this change occur? How did the industry become so powerful and so profitable? How has it been able to withstand critics' accusations that funeral directors exploit the bereaved, favoring profit over people? In a nation that embraces individuality, why do most Americans end up at the funeral home? In this seminar, we will examine the origins, evolution, and growth of the American funeral industry, as well as explore some emerging alternatives to its traditional practices to learn how Americans are beginning to use the power of consumer choice to regain control over the business of death.
FSSO 185R	America's Business	4 Units	This seminar is concerned with the nature, rationale, and consequences of America's business philosophies and practices as they influence Americans and the world at large. The starting point for our inquiry will be a famous phrase spoken by President Calvin Coolidge in 1925: "the chief business of the American people is business." By this Coolidge meant that Americans were generally motivated by commercial activities like producing, buying, selling, and investing. But he also explained that they were guided by certain ideals: industry, ambition, integrity, and a desire for progress and collective benefit. Taking Coolidge's statement as our starting point, in this seminar we will examine a series of vignettes of American business practices and their consequences, both positive and, occasionally, not so positive. Is Coolidge's assessment still accurate? Are Americans chiefly motivated by business? Are they guided by the principles he identified? These questions are particularly relevant in two ways. First, recently there has been rising discontent about, and vigorous challenges of, American business and the economic and social conditions it has created, such as increased economic inequality, decreased socioeconomic class mobility, a culture cheapened by crass materialism, and a rapidly deteriorating environment. Second, these concerns and critiques are not limited to US business. To the extent that American business practices and philosophies influence economies around the world, we might modify Coolidge's dictum to state that the chief business of the world's people is American business (or at least, American-style business). Given the influence of American business, both domestically and internationally, it is more important than ever to examine critically the extent to which American business is--or is not--fulfilling its ideals.
FSSO 185T	Homelessness in the United States of America	4 Units	Despite some positive signs over the past decade, homelessness in the United States remains incredibly high and recently shows signs of worsening. According to the most reliable government report, on a single night in January 2018, 553,000 people were found not to have a safe, permanent place to sleep. When we consider the turnover in the population of people who experience homelessness for at least a few nights during the course of a year, this number could be significantly higher. What causes homelessness? What is the experience of those without a home?  And what steps can be taken to address meeting this basic need? In this seminar, we will take an interdisciplinary approach to investigate the intersection of health and housing in order to better understand the phenomenon of homelessness and the people it affects. Using unstructured observations and community assessment approaches, we will consider personal and societal values, ethical dilemmas, and the meaning of "home." We will examine historical, socio-politico, and socio-economic factors that shape the lived experience of individuals and families without a permanent home. At the same time, we will study the common and divergent experiences of subgroups within the homeless population.  Finally, we will assess the successes and limitations of various interventions and policy responses intended to address the homelessness problem.
FSSO 185U	Women and Leadership	4 Units	Across many fields--from the Women's March demonstrations, to women in sports, science, film, and more--women are becoming visible, powerful leaders as they develop new practices for what it means to lead. The 2016 presidential election and the 2018 midterm election highlighted women's leadership as a key issue in democracy and politics today. In this seminar, we will explore critically the social construction of gender and leadership identities, including feminist leadership. We will examine social problems related to gender and leadership in the arts, politics, business, and society broadly. We will meet many women leaders throughout Northeast Ohio to understand their paths to leadership and success. In addition, since women cannot be viewed as a monolith, we will take an intersectional approach to understanding leadership identity and pay attention to gender, race, nationality, class, and sexuality. Regardless of your own gender identity, by analyzing historical and political leadership narratives in this class you will foster your own sense of gender consciousness. You will sharpen your ability to apply gender and race as categories of critical analysis. By writing your own leadership narrative, you will develop your own explanation for what it means to be a leader.
FSSO 186B	Decolonialization	4 Units	Decolonization is the process of returning sovereignty to societies that have been colonized. In addressing the colonial world order created by European nations, decolonization became an explicit focus of international politics by the mid-20th century, long after the American Revolution. Today, it remains potent concerning the remaining nations of the world, including the United States of America, that are considered settler colonial, i.e., where the colonizers live on the land that they have taken, rather than merely extracting resources from it for a home society abroad. Decolonization is more than a matter of sovereignty. It involves creating alternatives for the cultural systems that normalize colonization. This practice of cultural critique is called "decoloniality." It aims at beginning, carrying through, and closing out decolonization through mental and cultural change. The course blends history, political science, cultural studies, and philosophy. Students learn about the history of decolonization, examples of current struggles against settler colonization, and the discourse of decoloniality, engaging in what is called "decolonial thought." They achieve a grasp of the history of decolonization struggles, awareness of the complexities of decolonization past and present, and comfort with the complex discourse of decoloniality. Students develop their philosophical outlook on decolonization today.
FSSO 186D	Arts, Culture and the City: The Local and Global in Cleveland, Ohio	4 Units	The words "Arts and Culture" frequently appear in conversations about how to improve city life. They are seen as ways to cultivate community, social connection, equity, democracy, and education. And yet, unlike other services such as water and parks, which are often managed through centralized city-funded departments, the arts in most cities rely on a loosely organized network of public and private entities including schools, museums, philanthropies, corporations, small businesses, neighborhoods and individuals. These entities sometimes have very different definitions of the arts, why they are important, who they serve and how they should contribute to the organism of the city. Such differences can lead to disparate and conflicting ideas about how the needs of the city ought to be assessed and addressed. In this seminar, we will investigate the various players that constitute, promote, and define arts and culture in greater Cleveland, ranging from neighborhood nonprofits and businesses to powerful regional institutions with multi-million-dollar endowments. As home to one of the centers for African-American theater in the United States, one of the largest public libraries in the United States and one of the most visited art museums in the world, the local attention to Cleveland resonates with much larger questions about arts, culture and the city. How do stakeholders define their agendas in relation to both the local and global nature of the city? Are the arts conceptualized from top-down perspectives, bottom-up perspectives or somewhere in between? How do the fractures of contemporary life appear in art contexts seeking to create connections and a vibrant public life? Through an exploration of these questions related to the arts, we will gain a better understanding of the forces -- both near and far -- that shape cities.
ANTH 101	Exploring Anthropology	1 Unit	The broad field of anthropology studies "all things human" in ways that stand apart from sociology, psychology, history, and other areas of the humanities and sciences.  This course explores anthropologists, study of archaeology, culture, human biology, language and medicine to understand humans in general and in specific contexts.  It dispels common myths and misconceptions (for instance, archaeologists like to excavate graves, humans evolved from monkeys, the field deals with primitive people, it is not scientific).  The faculty of the Case Western Reserve University Anthropology Department and affiliated anthropologists talk briefly about their field or subfield, its big questions, and their research.
ANTH 102	Being Human: An Introduction to Social and Cultural Anthropology	3 Units	The nature of culture and humans as culture-bearing animals. The range of cultural phenomena including language, social organization, religion, and culture change, and the relevance of anthropology for contemporary social, economic, and ecological problems.
ANTH 103	Introduction to Human Evolution	3 Units	Physical, cultural, and technological evolution of humans. The systematic interrelationships between humans, culture, and environment.
ANTH 107	Archaeology: An Introduction	3 Units	Basic archaeological concepts are discussed followed by a review of human cultural and biological evolution from the earliest times through development of state organized societies. Geographical scope is worldwide with special attention given to ecological and cultural relationships affecting human societies through time.
ANTH 215	Health, Culture, and Disease: An Introduction to Medical Anthropology	3 Units	This course is an introduction to the field of Medical Anthropology. Medical Anthropology is concerned with the cross-cultural study of culture, health, and illness. During the course of the semester, our survey will include (1) theoretical orientations and key concepts; (2) the cross-cultural diversity of health beliefs and practices (abroad and at home); and (3) contemporary issues and special populations (e.g., AIDS, homelessness, refugees, women's health, and children at risk).
ANTH 225	Evolution	3 Units	Multidisciplinary study of the course and processes of organic evolution provides a broad understanding of the evolution of structural and functional diversity, the relationships among organisms and their environments, and the phylogenetic relationships among major groups of organisms.  Topics include the genetic basis of micro- and macro-evolutionary change, the concept of adaptation, natural selection, population dynamics, theories of species formation, principles of phylogenetic inference, biogeography, evolutionary rates, evolutionary convergence, homology, Darwinian medicine, and conceptual and philosophic issues in evolutionary theory. Offered as ANTH 225, BIOL 225, EEPS 225, HSTY 225, and PHIL 225.
ANTH 233	Introduction to Jewish Folklore	3 Units	Exploration of a variety of genres, research methods and interpretations of Jewish folklore, from antiquity to the present. Emphasis on how Jewish folk traditions and culture give us access to the spirit and mentality of the many different generations of the Jewish ethnic group, illuminating its past and informing the direction of its future development.   Offered as ANTH 233, RLGN 233, and JDST 233. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANTH 255	Global Judaism: Diversity Across the Jewish World	3 Units	Scattered across the globe over the course of millennia, Jews' diverse histories and environments have given rise to a great range of religious, cultural and social forms. Using ethnographies as our primary texts, we will think critically and comparatively about Judaism and Jewishness in the Americas, Europe, Africa, and Asia.  Along our journey, we examine how Jews have navigated their experiences as minorities in their many diaspora homelands, and how they have they adapted their cultural and religious practices to the various environments in which they have found themselves.  In addition to exploring their Jewishness vis-à-vis others, we also examine questions of exclusion and belonging that Jews have faced as they have encountered each another in recent decades through tourism, mass migration, globalization, and the internet. How do the world's varied Jewish groups - who are of different skin colors, who speak different languages, and who carry different historical memories - navigate ethnic divides, race relations, and religious diversity? Should we speak of a single Jewish religion and Jewish people at all? Offered as ANTH 255, ETHS 255, JDST 255 and RLGN 255. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANTH 300	Global Health Design in Uganda	1 - 3 Units	The CWRU Anthropology-Engineering Collaborative (AEC) offers this unique course applying social science and engineering skills and expertise to address global health issues in Uganda. The AEC is part of a longstanding collaboration between CWRU and Makerere University in Kampala, Uganda. Students collaborate with students at Makerere University in Kampala, Uganda and the CWRU student group, Global Health Design Collaborative (GHDC), to design and implement solutions to specific health issues in Luwero, Uganda.   Students meet weekly during the semester to learn about global health technology design and anthropology. Students work with GHDC and program faculty on specific projects; activities may include conducting needs assessment, prototype development, design validation and verification, and preparation of a project report. Current projects focus on designing a pediatric pulse oximeter; identifying means to preserve the cold chain for vaccine outreach and improving medical waste disposal.   In Uganda, students and their Makerere University counterparts travel together to Luwero district where they visit health centers to collaborate with local staff to review current design prototypes and issues. Activities include: talking to health center staff at different levels of the health care system, observing a community health outreach, and meeting with diverse stakeholders in Luwero and Kampala. Students gain hands-on experience in engineering design, social science methods, and working in transnational, interdisciplinary teams and contribute directly to ongoing efforts to address global health issues in Uganda. Students are encouraged to contribute to the projects through ongoing work with GHDC.  The course may be taken as either ENGR 350U or ANTH 300. The course fee covers travel and on-the-ground expenses. The class is open to all majors but enrollment is by application and instructors' consent. Students who enroll in 3 credits may count the class for the CSE humanities/social science requirement and/or the CAS Global and Cultural Diversity requirement.  Offered as ENGR 350U and ANTH 300.
ANTH 302	Darwinian Medicine	3 Units	Darwinian medicine deals with evolutionary aspects of modern human disease.  It applies the concepts and methods of evolutionary biology to the question of why we are vulnerable to disease.  Darwinian (or evolutionary) medicine proposes several general hypotheses about disease causation including disease as evolutionary legacy and design compromise, the result of a novel environment, a consequence of genetic adaptation, the result of infectious organisms' evolutionary adaptations, and disease symptoms as manifestation of defense mechanisms.  It proposes that evolutionary ideas can explain, help to prevent and perhaps help to treat some diseases.  This course presents the basic logic of Darwinian medicine and evaluates hypotheses about specific diseases that illustrate each of the hypotheses about disease causation. Recommended preparation: ANTH 103. Offered as ANTH 302 and ANTH 402.
ANTH 303	Interdisciplinary Solutions to Global Health Issues	3 Units	This unique course brings together the expertise of engineers and social scientists to address global health issues through a combination of classroom-based learning and experiential learning through team-based design projects and field-based community assessments.  Students will experience the process of engineering design by participating in teams organized around solutions to real-world health problems in the developing world.  Methods from social sciences will be practiced and brought to bear in the process, including assessment of global health needs, and evaluation of success of interventions. Students will study and discuss current key issues in global health, and ethics surrounding health care, disparity, methods of intervention, and develop skills in how to define and frame problems and communicate effectively across disciplines.   The course is organized around ongoing projects that seek to design technical solutions to global health issues, with a focus on Uganda. The teams will also work and learn with students and faculty of Biomedical Engineering and Social Sciences at Makerere University of Kampala (MUK), Uganda.  Examples of interactions with MUK will include discussion of common readings, peer-review, and joint planning, implementation, and review of fieldwork.   Students enrolled in ANTH 303/ ENGR 397 are eligible to travel to Uganda to participate in project activities over Spring Break. Travelers must be enrolled in ENGR 350U.   This course is an approved SAGES Departmental Seminar.  A student in the Case School of Engineering may use this course to meet an Engineering Core Breadth requirement, either in place of ENGL 398 and ENGR 398, or as a Social Science course (ANTH 303 cross-list).  No student may count the course to satisfy both of these requirements.  Offered as ANTH 303 and ENGR 397. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANTH 305	Public Policy in Child Development	3 Units	This course introduces students to issues in public policy that impact children and families. Local, state, and federal child policy will be considered, and topics will include, for example, policies related to child poverty, education, child welfare, juvenile justice, and children's physical and mental health. Students will learn how policy is developed, how research informs policy and vice versa, and a framework for analyzing social policy. Recommended preparation: One social sciences course or consent. Offered as ANTH 305, ANTH 405, CHST 301, CHST 401, and POSC 382A.
ANTH 306	The Anthropology of Childhood and the Family	3 Units	Child-rearing patterns and the family as an institution, using evidence from Western and non-Western cultures. Human universals and cultural variation, the experience of childhood and recent changes in the American family.  Recommended preparation: ANTH 102. Offered as ANTH 306 and ANTH 406.
ANTH 307	Experiential Learning in Child Policy	3 Units	Focus on state and federal legislative policy impacting children, youth, and families.  Course includes an experiential learning component at the state or federal level and a travel experience to either Columbus, OH or Washington, DC to learn firsthand how policy is formed. Students may take this course twice for credit. Offered as ANTH 307 and CHST 302.
ANTH 308	Child Policy Externship	3 Units	Externships offered through CHST 398/ANTH 308 give students an opportunity to work directly with professionals who design and implement policies that impact the lives of children and their families. Agencies involved are active in areas such as public health, including behavioral health, education. juvenile justice, childcare and/or child welfare.  Students apply for the externships, and selected students are placed in local public or nonprofit agencies with a policy focus.  Each student develops an individualized learning plan in consultation with the Childhood Studies Program faculty and the supervisor in the agency. CHST 398/ANTH 308 is a 3 credit-hour course and may be taken twice for a total of 6 credit hours. Offered as CHST 398 and ANTH 308. Prereq: CHST 301.
ANTH 310	Introduction to Linguistic Anthropology	3 Units	This is an introduction to the core concepts, theories and methodologies that form the study of language from an anthropological point of view.  The course provides exposure to current issues in linguistic anthropological research and reviews some of the foundational topics of research past, highlighting the contributions of linguistics to anthropology and social science.  Topics to be explored include: 1) an overview of the study of language (language structure and patterns, the effects of linguistic categories on thought and behavior, meaning and linguistic relativity, cross-language comparison, and non-verbal communication); 2) doing linguistic anthropology "on the ground" (an intro to the laboratory and field techniques of linguistic anthropology); 3) the study of language as function and social action (language and social structure speech acts and events, verbal art, language and emotion); and 4) the study of language/discourse and power (language in politics, medicine, and law). Offered as ANTH 310 and ANTH 410.
ANTH 312	Ethnography of Southeast Asia	3 Units	This course examines the people and cultures of Southeast Asia from an anthropological perspective. From a starting place of the local people we will explore important aspects of life in this region such as agriculture, religion, health, medicine, nation-building, ethnic identity, art, and technology. Additionally, we will examine and question the ideas, traditions, and scholarly modes of study that brought this geographical area together as a region. Offered as ANTH 312 and ANTH 412. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANTH 314	Cultures of the United States	3 Units	This course considers the rich ethnic diversity of the U.S. from the perspective of social/cultural anthropology. Conquest, immigration, problems of conflicts and accommodation, and the character of the diverse regional and ethnic cultures are considered as are forms of racism, discrimination, and their consequences. Groups of interest include various Latina/o and Native peoples, African-American groups, and specific ethnic groups of Pacific, Mediterranean, European, Asian, and Caribbean origin. Offered as ANTH 314, ETHS 314, and ANTH 414.
ANTH 316	Current Global Health Events	3 Units	This course will introduce students to an anthropological approach to understanding disease, illness, sickness and suffering in a global health context.  The course will expose students to biological, socio-cultural, historical, political-economic, and epidemiological assessments of the disease and illness states.  Students will be asked to bring a critical focus to the use of ethnographic, population-based, and clinical approaches to addresses global health problems.  Additionally students will learn about the key organizations, institutions, and commercial enterprises that come to play in the assessment, prioritizing, and treatment of these health issues. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: ANTH 102 and ANTH 215.
ANTH 319	Introduction to Statistical Analysis in the Social Sciences	3 Units	Statistical description (central tendency, variation, correlation, etc.) and statistical evaluation (two sample comparisons, regression, analysis of variance, non-parametric statistics). Developing an understanding of statistical inference, particularly on proper usage of statistical methods. Examples from the social sciences. Cannot be used to meet the A&S Humanities and Social Sciences requirement.  Not available for credit to students who have completed STAT 201, STAT 201R, or PSCL 282. Counts for CAS Quantitative Reasoning Requirement.
ANTH 320A	Field Methods and Field Work in Archaeology	3 - 6 Units	This course is intended to provide a home for archaeology field courses taken at other institutions.  It can be used for courses which provide students with a comprehensive introduction to archaeological field work, including classroom and practical training in archaeological methods, laboratory experience in dealing with artifacts, and instruction in the relevant cultural context.
ANTH 320B	Field Methods and Field Work in Paleoanthropology	3 - 6 Units	This course is intended to provide a home for paleoanthropology field courses taken at other institutions.  It can be used for courses which provide students with a comprehensive introduction to paleoanthropological field work, including classroom and practical training in paleoanthropological methods, laboratory experience in dealing with fossils and artifacts, and instruction in the relevant species.
ANTH 323	AIDS: Epidemiology, Biology, and Culture	3 Units	This course will examine the biological and cultural impact of AIDS in different societies around the world. Topics include: the origin and evolution of the virus, the evolutionary implications of the epidemic, routes of transmission, a historical comparison of AIDS to other epidemics in human history, current worldwide prevalences of AIDS, and cultural responses to the epidemic. Special emphasis will be placed on the long-term biological and social consequences of the epidemic. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102 or ANTH 103. Offered as ANTH 323 and ANTH 423.
ANTH 325	Economic Anthropology	3 Units	Economic anthropology is a sub-field of anthropology that examines how people in modern and non-modern societies produce, distribute, exchange, and consume goods, services, and other valued resources. The sub-field seeks to understand how cultures, including our own, organize and structure these activities through institutions, rituals, and beliefs systems. However, unlike the formal approach of the field of economics, the in-depth methods of economic anthropology concentrate on day-to-day experiences of what the economic means, how this is defined, and what we can learn about human behavior through it.  This course will introduce students to economic anthropology and some of the major questions and challenges this field addresses. The history of this sub-field, how it relates to economic sociology, and areas where economic anthropology and traditional economics overlap, will also be explored. This class does not present economic anthropology and modern economics as adversaries, instead how and why they are fundamentally different orientations with often seemingly little in common. On this backdrop, this class will survey a number of different topics, including: health commodification; gift exchange; commodity chains; the history of money and debt; why objects have value; how people make ends meet; rational vs. non-rational decision-making; behavioral economic experiments conducted in other cultures; development economics, and why some objects and services have prices while others do not. Offered as ANTH 325 and ANTH 425.
ANTH 326	Power, Illness, and Inequality: The Political Economy of Health	3 Units	This course explores the relationship between social inequality and the distribution of health and illness across class, race, gender, sexual orientation, and national boundaries. Class readings drawn from critical anthropological approaches to the study of health emphasize the fundamental importance of power relations and economic constraints in explaining patterns of disease.  The course critically examines the nature of Western biomedicine and inequality in the delivery of health services.  Special consideration is given to political economic analysis of health issues in the developing world such as AIDS, hunger, reproductive health, and primary health care provision. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102 or ANTH 215. Offered as ANTH 326 and ANTH 426.
ANTH 328	Medical Anthropology and Public Health	3 Units	Anthropology has a longstanding relationship with the field of public health, which dates back to before the flourishing of medical anthropology as a subfield. Direct participation of medical anthropologists in public health research and practice continues to grow. This course explores the intersection of medical anthropology and public health from the perspective of anthropological history, theory, and methods.  Course topics include: the history of anthropological work in public health, medical anthropology theory as a guide to anthropological public health research, and anthropological methods and approaches to public health work. Case studies from around the world will be employed throughout the course. Offered as ANTH 328 and ANTH 428.
ANTH 329	Anthropological Perspectives of Migration and Health	3 Units	This course provides an overview of anthropological perspectives on transnational migration and health. We will focus particularly on health and health care issues concerning refugees, asylum seekers and undocumented migrants. This course will focus on the following topics: the physical and mental health consequences of forced migration; refugee trauma; the intersection of health care and immigration policies; immigration and health care access and utilization. Readings and coursework will consider the sociocultural, political, and economic factors that contribute to migrant health disparities. We will also address issues of medical pluralism among transnational migrants and critically examine the concept of cultural competence in clinical settings. Class readings will comprise a variety of theoretical and ethnographic literature within anthropology and closely related disciplines, drawing on cases from across the globe and in cross-cultural comparison. The class will use lectures, readings, and class discussions to explore these relevant issues in migration and health, with the opportunity to engage in hands on ethnographic work with refugees locally. Offered as ANTH 329 and ANTH 429.
ANTH 331	The Most Ancient Near East	3 Units	The Near East, archaeologically, is the most intensely researched area in the world.  The research, spanning 150 years, reveals a continuous record of human adaptation spanning two million years, five human species, multiple major environmental changes, and shifts in human adaptive strategies from nomadic hunting and gathering to sedentary village agriculture and the emergence of urban centers "civilization."  The archaeological record of this extraordinary period beginning two million years ago until about 4000 BC is reviewed.  Emphasis is placed on the human response to social and ecological changes.  The course examines how the emergence of sedentary settlements, surplus food production, population growth, interregional trade, and social-economically stratified societies fundamentally changed the human condition.  Recommended preparation: ANTH 102 or ANTH 107. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANTH 333	Roots of Ancient India: Archaeology of South Asia	3 Units	Archaeological discoveries in South Asia (modern India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, and Nepal) reveal a continuous record of human habitation from almost two million years ago until the present.  Early human populations in the region encountered dramatically changing ecological conditions resulting in various cultural adaptations over this long period.  Beginning with the earliest hunter-gatherer populations, archaeological data reveal a diversity of cultural changes/adaptations in South Asia resulting in the indigenous development of sedentary agricultural societies coexisting with hunters and gatherers, and with pastoral nomadic groups interacting over diverse econiches.  These cultural developments resulted in the formation of the Harappan (Indus Valley) culture - a unique, ancient (2600-1300 BC) Old World civilization.  Archaeological data indicate this Harappan culture provided basic fundamental cultural traits that evolved into the culturally Early Historic Indian Tradition.  Special attention is given to theoretical controversies surrounding the cultural continuity issue in South Asian culture history and its significance for understanding Old World archaeology. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102 or ANTH 107. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANTH 335	Illegal Drugs and Society	3 Units	This course provides perspectives on illegal drug use informed by the social, political and economic dimensions of the issues.  Framed by the history, epidemiology, and medical consequences of drug use, students will confront the complex challenges posed by addiction.  Anthropological research conducted in the U.S. and cross-culturally will demonstrate, elaborate and juxtapose various clinical, public health, and law enforcement policies and perspectives.  Topics examined will include: why exclusively using a bio-medical model of addiction is inadequate; how effective is the war on drugs; what prevention, intervention and treatment efforts work; and various ideological/moral perspectives on illegal drug use.   Offered as ANTH 335 and ANTH 435.
ANTH 337	Comparative Medical Systems	3 Units	This course considers the world's major medical systems. Foci include professional and folk medical systems of Asia and South Asia, North and South America, Europe and the Mediterranean, including the Christian and Islamic medical traditions. Attention is paid to medical origins and the relationship of popular to professional medicines. The examination of each medical tradition includes consideration of its psychological medicine and system of medical ethics. Recommended preparation: ANTH 215. Offered as ANTH 337 and ANTH 437.
ANTH 338	Maternal Health: Anthropological Perspectives on Reproductive Practices and Health Policy	3 Units	The reproductive process is shared by humans as biological beings.  However, the experience of pregnancy and childbirth is also dependent on the cultural, social, political, historical, and political-economic setting.  This course frames issues in reproductive health by looking at the complex issues associated with maternal health and mortality world-wide.  After reviewing biomedical perspectives on reproductive processes this course will focus on childbirth and pregnancy as the process and ritual by which societies welcome new members.  This course will review ethnomedical concepts; discuss the interaction between local, national, and global agendas shaping reproductive practices; and conclude with anthropological critiques of reproductive health initiatives. Offered as ANTH 338 and ANTH 438.
ANTH 339	Ethnographic and Qualitative Research Methods	3 Units	This is a course on applying ethnographic research methods in the social sciences.  Ethnographic research seeks to understand and describe the experiences of research participants (i.e. subjects) through becoming involved in their daily lives.  Findings from ethnography are generated through systematic observation within the natural context in which behavior occurs (i.e. fieldwork).  Unlike methods that emphasize detachment, distance, and objectivity, ethnography involves developing knowledge by becoming an ad hoc member of the group(s) one is studying.  The principal techniques of ethnography, "participant-observation" and "In-depth open ended interviewing," require actively engaging the research process.  This class will explore ethnographic research techniques, as well as other qualitative research methods.  In addition to addressing how such methods make claims about social phenomena, this class will also explore more practical topics such as: developing questions, entering the field, establishing rapport, taking and managing field notes, coding data, and data analysis.  Lectures, readings, and class discussion will be complimented by assignments using techniques. Offered as ANTH 339 and ANTH 439. Prereq: ANTH 102.
ANTH 344	Archaeology of the Ancient World	3 Units	This course examines the great civilizations of the ancient world, particularly those of the Ancient Near East, Egypt, Greece and Rome, through the archaeological record. Each of these geographic areas and their respective cultures will be individually explored, but also examined within a broader historical context. Particular focus will be placed on the social, political, religious, and economic ideas that were exchanged across Mesopotamia, Anatolia, the Levant and the Mediterranean and the influence this interconnectivity had on these ancient societies.  Offered as ANEE 344, ANEE 444, ANTH 344, ANTH 444, ARTH 344, ARTH 444, CLSC 344 and CLSC 444. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANTH 345	Ethnicity, Gender, and Mental Health	3 Units	An overview of mental health status and ethnicity. Analysis of ethnicity in relation to culture, social class, gender, sociopolitical conflict and the world refugee crisis. Consideration of populations at special risk for the development of specific mental disorders (e.g., schizophrenia, affective disorders, adjustment and stress disorders). Contemporary ethnographic survey of ethnic groups at risk both at home and abroad. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102. Offered as ANTH 345 and ANTH 445.
ANTH 347	Cultural Ecology and Sustainability	3 Units	Could the quest of modern society for sustainability, in the face of devastating climate change and massive biodiversity loss that threaten life on Earth as we know it, gain from understanding how other past and present cultures around the world have dealt with sustainability challenges? Are there cultural patterns or clusters of ideas underlying the deleterious actions of modern culture towards the natural world that could be clarified through a comparison with indigenous or traditional cultures, some who lived sustainably for thousands of years and even enhanced the biodiversity of their surrounding environments? If cybernetic and semiotic principles that guide living systems were clarified, would this lead to more ecologically robust ways of engaging with the natural world and resolving contemporary sustainability issues? Is it the essential task of our time to develop and globalize an ecologically, socially, and economically sustainable "beyond modern" definition of human being? Is the global environment decay of our earthly home perhaps a clarion call by nature, compelling our species to integrate the wisdom of traditional knowledge along with the spectacular scientific and technological achievements of modernity if we are to survive? This seminar will explore these questions and more, with a primary objective of enhancing student environmental advocacy along with increasing their depth of experience when interacting with the natural world.  Offered as ANTH 347 and ANTH 447. Prereq: ANTH 102.
ANTH 349	Cultures of Latin America	3 Units	The aim of this course is to consider cultural diversity and social inequality in contemporary Latin America from an anthropological perspective.  A variety of aspects related to ethnicity, religion, music, gender, social movements, cuisine, urban spaces, violence, and ecology are considered in addition to current economic and political issues.  These topics will be analyzed in relation to Latin America's complex historical and social formation and its identity representations.  The course takes under consideration various case studies in which not just local communities but also perceptions of national institutions and practices will be analyzed from pluralistic approaches (provided by either Latin American and non-Latin American researchers) that combine fieldwork, interviews and life experiences with textual and media sources.  Special attention will be paid to contemporary global issues affecting Latin America. Offered as ANTH 349 and ANTH 449. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ANTH 102.
ANTH 353	Chinese Culture and Society	3 Units	Focuses on Chinese cultural and social institutions during the Maoist and post-Maoist eras.  Topics include ideology, economics, politics, religion, family life, and popular culture. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102. Offered as ANTH 353 and ANTH 453. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANTH 354	Health and Healing in East Asia	3 Units	This course examines the illness experiences and the healing practices in East Asia. After introducing the anthropological approaches to the study of medicine, this course will explore the practices of ethnomedicine and biomedicine, mental health, family planning and reproductive health, the experience of aging and care giving, infectious disease, environmental health, and biotechnology. By delving into the illness experiences and the healing practices in East Asia, the course will discuss issues related to medical pluralism, health inequality, biological citizenship, social stigmatization, and bioethics. Offered as ANTH 354 and ANTH 454. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANTH 355	Paleodiet(s)?	Understanding Food and Diet Past and Present	3 Units	The Paleodiet promotes to the public the notion that humans evolved to eat one single diet; that is far from the truth.  In this class, we will learn about the evolution of our diets and nutrition, the diversity of human diets over time and space, the relationship of diet to health, and the methods biological anthropologists use to scientifically study diet.  Expect to learn about early human diets right up to modern diets. Additionally, this course will focus on how to read and interpret scientific papers/concepts, as well as how to construct a scientific argument.  Students will apply those skills by giving a presentation to classmates following the structure of scientific meetings. Offered as ANTH 355 and ANTH 455. Prereq: ANTH 103.
ANTH 359	Introduction to Global Health	3 Units	This course is an introduction to the field of international and global health from the perspective of anthropology. Key health problems in the world are identified and anthropological research on these issues is presented and examined. The course covers current international and global health issues and reviews the history of anthropological engagement in the field. Case studies of current health issues will be discussed. Offered as ANTH 359 and ANTH 459.
ANTH 360	Global Politics of Reproduction	3 Units	This course offers an anthropological examination of reproductive politics around the world. It explores historical, cultural, socioeconomic, political, and technological factors contributing to reproductive activities. After introducing the anthropological approaches to the study of reproduction, the course will delve into the ways to regulate reproduction in historical and contemporary times, various factors contributing to fertility change, state intervention in reproduction, and assisted reproductive technologies.  Offered as ANTH 360, ANTH 460, and WGST 360. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANTH 362	Contemporary Theory in Anthropology	3 Units	A critical examination of anthropological thought in England, France and the United States during the second half of the twentieth century.  Emphasis will be on the way authors formulate questions that motivate anthropological discourse, on the way central concepts are formulated and applied and on the controversies and debates that result.  Readings are drawn from influential texts by prominent contemporary anthropologists. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102. Offered as ANTH 362 and ANTH 462.
ANTH 365	Gender and Sex Differences: Cross-cultural Perspective	3 Units	Gender roles and sex differences throughout the life cycle considered from a cross-cultural perspective. Major approaches to explaining sex roles discussed in light of information from both Western and non-Western cultures.  Offered as ANTH 365, ANTH 465 and WGST 365. Prereq: ANTH 102 or consent of department.
ANTH 366	Population Change: Problems and Solutions	3 Units	The course examines population processes and their social consequences from an anthropological perspective. It introduces basic concepts and theories of population studies and demonstrates the ways in which anthropological research contributes to our understanding of population issues. We will explore questions such as: How has world population changed in history? How does a population age or grow younger? What are the factors affecting population health? Why do people migrate? And what are the policy implications of population change? We will examine the sociocultural, economic, political, and ecological factors contributing to population processes, such as factors affecting childbearing decisions, cultural context of sex-selective abortion, various caregiving arrangements for the elderly, and policy responses to population change. We will explore these issues with cases from across the world, with a special focus on China, the world's most populous country with the most massive family-planning program in modern human history. Offered as ANTH 366 and ANTH 466.
ANTH 367	Topics in Evolutionary Biology	3 Units	The focus for this course on a special topic of interest in evolutionary biology will vary from one offering to the next. Examples of possible topics include theories of speciation, the evolution of language, the evolution of sex, evolution and biodiversity, molecular evolution. ANAT/ANTH/EEPS/PHIL/PHOL 467/BIOL 468 will require a longer, more sophisticated term paper, and additional class presentation. Offered as ANTH 367, BIOL 368, EEPS 367, PHIL 367, ANAT 467, ANTH 467, BIOL 468, EEPS 467, PHIL 467 and PHOL 467. Prereq: ANTH 225 or equivalent.
ANTH 369D	The Anthropology of Nutrition	3 Units	Human nutrition is examined from an anthropological perspective. We will briefly cover methods for assessing and evaluating dietary intake and dietary patterns. The remainder of the course will focus on various social, ecological, and genetic factors which influence human nutritional patterns and the causes and consequences of protein-energy malnutrition. The course will be taught in a seminar format and is designed to enhance your skills in critically reading the anthropological literature and in improving your written and oral communication skills.  A student may not receive credit for both ANTH 369 and ANTH 369D. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102, ANTH 103. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
ANTH 371	Culture, Behavior, and Person: Psychological Anthropology	3 Units	Cross-cultural perspectives on personality, human development, individual variability, cognition, deviant behavior, and the role of the individual in his/her society. Classic and contemporary anthropological writings on Western and non-Western societies. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102. Offered as ANTH 371 and ANTH 471.
ANTH 372	Anthropological Approaches to Religion	3 Units	The development of, and current approaches to, comparative religion from an anthropological perspective.  Topics include witchcraft, ritual, myth, healing, religious language and symbolism, religion and gender, religious experience, the nature of the sacred, religion and social change, altered states of consciousness, and evil.  Using material from a wide range of world cultures, critical assessment is made of conventional distinctions such as those between rational/irrational, natural/supernatural, magic/religion, and primitive/civilized. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102. Offered as ANTH 372, RLGN 372 and ANTH 472.
ANTH 376	Topics in the Anthropology of Health and Medicine	3 Units	Special topics of interest, such as the biology of human adaptability; the ecology of the human life cycle health delivery systems; transcultural psychiatry; nutrition, health, and disease; paleoepidemiology; and population anthropology. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102 or ANTH 103. Offered as ANTH 376 and ANTH 476.
ANTH 379	Topics in Cultural and Social Anthropology	3 Units	Special topics of interest across the range of social and cultural anthropology. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102. Offered as ANTH 379 and ANTH 479.
ANTH 380	Independent Study in Laboratory Archaeology I	1 - 3 Units	This course provides an introduction to the basic methods and techniques of artifact curation and laboratory analysis in archaeology.  Under the supervision of the instructor, each student will develop and carry out a focused project of material analysis and interpretation using the archaeology collections of the Cleveland Museum of Natural History.  Each student is required to spend a minimum of two hours per week in the Archaeology laboratory for each credit hour taken.  By the end of the course, the student will prepare a short report describing the results of their particular project. Recommended preparation: ANTH 107 and permission of department, and prior permission of Department of Archaeology at the Cleveland Museum of Natural History.
ANTH 381	Independent Study in Laboratory Archaeology II	1 - 3 Units	This course provides an introduction to the basic methods and techniques of artifact curation and laboratory analysis in archaeology.  Under the supervision of the instructor, each student will develop and carry out a focused project of material analysis and interpretation using the archaeology collections of the Cleveland Museum of Natural History.  Each student is required to spend a minimum of two hours per week in the Archaeology laboratory for each credit hour taken.  By the end of the course, the student will prepare a short report describing the results of their particular project. Recommended preparation: ANTH 107 and permission of department, and prior permission of Department of Archaeology at the Cleveland Museum of Natural History.
ANTH 382	Anthropological and Ecological Perspectives on Preserving and Restoring the Natural World	3 Units	Now that the environmentally deleterious effects of modern Western culture on the natural world have reached major proportions it has become crucial to explore innovative solutions to this dilemma.  In this course novel perspectives derived from the intersection of anthropology and ecology are discussed.  The primary perspective focused upon is the understanding that human culture and the natural world in which it is embedded are essentially communicative, or semiotic processes, which thrive upon diverse interaction and feedback.  Preserving and restoring the Natural World thus shifts from protecting individual species and particular cultural practices to enhancing the communicative matrix of life and multiple cultural views of the environment.  Through this understanding, students will learn to apply a more elegant, effective, and aesthetically pleasing perspective to the challenging environmental issues facing our contemporary world.  An in-depth examination of the North American Prairie, along with a comparison of influences on the landscape by indigenous and modern Western Culture will serve as the particular region of focus. Offered as ANTH 382 and ANTH 482. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
ANTH 385	Applied Anthropology	3 Units	This class will provide students with an overview of how anthropologists put theories, methods, and findings to use in addressing social issues and problems.  Applied projects presented will span a diverse range of topics and fields, including: healthcare and medicine, nutrition, international development, displacement of populations, education, as well projects from business and industry. Class discussion will address orientations of and advantages in applied approaches, as well the ethical questions such projects often encounter. Offered as ANTH 385 and ANTH 485.
ANTH 389	Introduction to Forensic Anthropology	3 Units	Forensic anthropology involves using a variety of methods and theories about human biology to answer medical and legal questions. Individuals who work as forensic anthropologists collaborate closely with police officers, lawyers, doctors, medical examiners, and other specialists to identify human remains and analyze skeletal trauma in cases of suspicious and unnatural death. Throughout the course, students will be introduced to the techniques and underlying theory used by anthropologists to recover skeletal remains, reconstruct a biological profile from the skeleton, interpret skeletal trauma, and assist in the identification process. Students will also become familiar with the application of forensic anthropology to issues of human rights and mass fatalities. Prereq: ANTH 103.
ANTH 391	Honors Tutorial	3 Units	Prereq:  Acceptance into Honors Program.
ANTH 392	Honors Tutorial	3 Units	Prereq:  Acceptance into Honors Program.
ANTH 396	Undergraduate Research in Evolutionary Biology	3 Units	Students propose and conduct guided research on an aspect of evolutionary biology. The research will be sponsored and supervised by a member of the CASE faculty or other qualified professional. A written report must be submitted to the Evolutionary Biology Steering Committee before credit is granted. Offered as ANTH 396, BIOL 396, EEPS 396, and PHIL 396. Prereq: ANTH 225 or equivalent.
ANTH 398	Anthropology SAGES Capstone	3 Units	Supervised original research on a topic in anthropology, culminating in a written report and a public presentation. The research project may be in the form of an independent research project, a literature review, or some other original project with anthropological significance.  The project must be approved and supervised by faculty.  Group research projects are acceptable, but a plan which clearly identifies the distinct and substantial role of each participant must be approved by the supervising faculty. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: Major in Anthropology.
ANTH 398C	Child Policy Externship and Capstone	3 Units	Externships offered through CHST/ANTH/PSCL 398C give students an opportunity to work directly with professionals who design and implement policies that impact the lives of children and their families. Agencies involved are active in areas such as public health, including behavioral health, education, juvenile justice, childcare and/or child welfare.  Students apply for the externships, and selected students are placed in local public or nonprofit agencies with a policy focus. Each student develops an individualized learning plan in consultation with the Childhood Studies Program faculty and the supervisor in the agency.  Offered as CHST 398C, ANTH 398C, and PSCL 398C. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: CHST 301.
ANTH 399	Independent Study	1 - 6 Units	Students may propose topics for independent reading and research.
ANTH 402	Darwinian Medicine	3 Units	Darwinian medicine deals with evolutionary aspects of modern human disease.  It applies the concepts and methods of evolutionary biology to the question of why we are vulnerable to disease.  Darwinian (or evolutionary) medicine proposes several general hypotheses about disease causation including disease as evolutionary legacy and design compromise, the result of a novel environment, a consequence of genetic adaptation, the result of infectious organisms' evolutionary adaptations, and disease symptoms as manifestation of defense mechanisms.  It proposes that evolutionary ideas can explain, help to prevent and perhaps help to treat some diseases.  This course presents the basic logic of Darwinian medicine and evaluates hypotheses about specific diseases that illustrate each of the hypotheses about disease causation. Recommended preparation: ANTH 103. Offered as ANTH 302 and ANTH 402.
ANTH 405	Public Policy in Child Development	3 Units	This course introduces students to issues in public policy that impact children and families. Local, state, and federal child policy will be considered, and topics will include, for example, policies related to child poverty, education, child welfare, juvenile justice, and children's physical and mental health. Students will learn how policy is developed, how research informs policy and vice versa, and a framework for analyzing social policy. Recommended preparation: One social sciences course or consent. Offered as ANTH 305, ANTH 405, CHST 301, CHST 401, and POSC 382A.
ANTH 406	The Anthropology of Childhood and the Family	3 Units	Child-rearing patterns and the family as an institution, using evidence from Western and non-Western cultures. Human universals and cultural variation, the experience of childhood and recent changes in the American family.  Recommended preparation: ANTH 102. Offered as ANTH 306 and ANTH 406.
ANTH 410	Introduction to Linguistic Anthropology	3 Units	This is an introduction to the core concepts, theories and methodologies that form the study of language from an anthropological point of view.  The course provides exposure to current issues in linguistic anthropological research and reviews some of the foundational topics of research past, highlighting the contributions of linguistics to anthropology and social science.  Topics to be explored include: 1) an overview of the study of language (language structure and patterns, the effects of linguistic categories on thought and behavior, meaning and linguistic relativity, cross-language comparison, and non-verbal communication); 2) doing linguistic anthropology "on the ground" (an intro to the laboratory and field techniques of linguistic anthropology); 3) the study of language as function and social action (language and social structure speech acts and events, verbal art, language and emotion); and 4) the study of language/discourse and power (language in politics, medicine, and law). Offered as ANTH 310 and ANTH 410.
ANTH 412	Ethnography of Southeast Asia	3 Units	This course examines the people and cultures of Southeast Asia from an anthropological perspective. From a starting place of the local people we will explore important aspects of life in this region such as agriculture, religion, health, medicine, nation-building, ethnic identity, art, and technology. Additionally, we will examine and question the ideas, traditions, and scholarly modes of study that brought this geographical area together as a region. Offered as ANTH 312 and ANTH 412. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANTH 414	Cultures of the United States	3 Units	This course considers the rich ethnic diversity of the U.S. from the perspective of social/cultural anthropology. Conquest, immigration, problems of conflicts and accommodation, and the character of the diverse regional and ethnic cultures are considered as are forms of racism, discrimination, and their consequences. Groups of interest include various Latina/o and Native peoples, African-American groups, and specific ethnic groups of Pacific, Mediterranean, European, Asian, and Caribbean origin. Offered as ANTH 314, ETHS 314, and ANTH 414.
ANTH 423	AIDS: Epidemiology, Biology, and Culture	3 Units	This course will examine the biological and cultural impact of AIDS in different societies around the world. Topics include: the origin and evolution of the virus, the evolutionary implications of the epidemic, routes of transmission, a historical comparison of AIDS to other epidemics in human history, current worldwide prevalences of AIDS, and cultural responses to the epidemic. Special emphasis will be placed on the long-term biological and social consequences of the epidemic. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102 or ANTH 103. Offered as ANTH 323 and ANTH 423.
ANTH 425	Economic Anthropology	3 Units	Economic anthropology is a sub-field of anthropology that examines how people in modern and non-modern societies produce, distribute, exchange, and consume goods, services, and other valued resources. The sub-field seeks to understand how cultures, including our own, organize and structure these activities through institutions, rituals, and beliefs systems. However, unlike the formal approach of the field of economics, the in-depth methods of economic anthropology concentrate on day-to-day experiences of what the economic means, how this is defined, and what we can learn about human behavior through it.  This course will introduce students to economic anthropology and some of the major questions and challenges this field addresses. The history of this sub-field, how it relates to economic sociology, and areas where economic anthropology and traditional economics overlap, will also be explored. This class does not present economic anthropology and modern economics as adversaries, instead how and why they are fundamentally different orientations with often seemingly little in common. On this backdrop, this class will survey a number of different topics, including: health commodification; gift exchange; commodity chains; the history of money and debt; why objects have value; how people make ends meet; rational vs. non-rational decision-making; behavioral economic experiments conducted in other cultures; development economics, and why some objects and services have prices while others do not. Offered as ANTH 325 and ANTH 425.
ANTH 426	Power, Illness, and Inequality: The Political Economy of Health	3 Units	This course explores the relationship between social inequality and the distribution of health and illness across class, race, gender, sexual orientation, and national boundaries. Class readings drawn from critical anthropological approaches to the study of health emphasize the fundamental importance of power relations and economic constraints in explaining patterns of disease.  The course critically examines the nature of Western biomedicine and inequality in the delivery of health services.  Special consideration is given to political economic analysis of health issues in the developing world such as AIDS, hunger, reproductive health, and primary health care provision. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102 or ANTH 215. Offered as ANTH 326 and ANTH 426.
ANTH 428	Medical Anthropology and Public Health	3 Units	Anthropology has a longstanding relationship with the field of public health, which dates back to before the flourishing of medical anthropology as a subfield. Direct participation of medical anthropologists in public health research and practice continues to grow. This course explores the intersection of medical anthropology and public health from the perspective of anthropological history, theory, and methods.  Course topics include: the history of anthropological work in public health, medical anthropology theory as a guide to anthropological public health research, and anthropological methods and approaches to public health work. Case studies from around the world will be employed throughout the course. Offered as ANTH 328 and ANTH 428.
ANTH 429	Anthropological Perspectives of Migration and Health	3 Units	This course provides an overview of anthropological perspectives on transnational migration and health. We will focus particularly on health and health care issues concerning refugees, asylum seekers and undocumented migrants. This course will focus on the following topics: the physical and mental health consequences of forced migration; refugee trauma; the intersection of health care and immigration policies; immigration and health care access and utilization. Readings and coursework will consider the sociocultural, political, and economic factors that contribute to migrant health disparities. We will also address issues of medical pluralism among transnational migrants and critically examine the concept of cultural competence in clinical settings. Class readings will comprise a variety of theoretical and ethnographic literature within anthropology and closely related disciplines, drawing on cases from across the globe and in cross-cultural comparison. The class will use lectures, readings, and class discussions to explore these relevant issues in migration and health, with the opportunity to engage in hands on ethnographic work with refugees locally. Offered as ANTH 329 and ANTH 429.
ANTH 435	Illegal Drugs and Society	3 Units	This course provides perspectives on illegal drug use informed by the social, political and economic dimensions of the issues.  Framed by the history, epidemiology, and medical consequences of drug use, students will confront the complex challenges posed by addiction.  Anthropological research conducted in the U.S. and cross-culturally will demonstrate, elaborate and juxtapose various clinical, public health, and law enforcement policies and perspectives.  Topics examined will include: why exclusively using a bio-medical model of addiction is inadequate; how effective is the war on drugs; what prevention, intervention and treatment efforts work; and various ideological/moral perspectives on illegal drug use.   Offered as ANTH 335 and ANTH 435.
ANTH 437	Comparative Medical Systems	3 Units	This course considers the world's major medical systems. Foci include professional and folk medical systems of Asia and South Asia, North and South America, Europe and the Mediterranean, including the Christian and Islamic medical traditions. Attention is paid to medical origins and the relationship of popular to professional medicines. The examination of each medical tradition includes consideration of its psychological medicine and system of medical ethics. Recommended preparation: ANTH 215. Offered as ANTH 337 and ANTH 437.
ANTH 438	Maternal Health: Anthropological Perspectives on Reproductive Practices and Health Policy	3 Units	The reproductive process is shared by humans as biological beings.  However, the experience of pregnancy and childbirth is also dependent on the cultural, social, political, historical, and political-economic setting.  This course frames issues in reproductive health by looking at the complex issues associated with maternal health and mortality world-wide.  After reviewing biomedical perspectives on reproductive processes this course will focus on childbirth and pregnancy as the process and ritual by which societies welcome new members.  This course will review ethnomedical concepts; discuss the interaction between local, national, and global agendas shaping reproductive practices; and conclude with anthropological critiques of reproductive health initiatives. Offered as ANTH 338 and ANTH 438.
ANTH 439	Ethnographic and Qualitative Research Methods	3 Units	This is a course on applying ethnographic research methods in the social sciences.  Ethnographic research seeks to understand and describe the experiences of research participants (i.e. subjects) through becoming involved in their daily lives.  Findings from ethnography are generated through systematic observation within the natural context in which behavior occurs (i.e. fieldwork).  Unlike methods that emphasize detachment, distance, and objectivity, ethnography involves developing knowledge by becoming an ad hoc member of the group(s) one is studying.  The principal techniques of ethnography, "participant-observation" and "In-depth open ended interviewing," require actively engaging the research process.  This class will explore ethnographic research techniques, as well as other qualitative research methods.  In addition to addressing how such methods make claims about social phenomena, this class will also explore more practical topics such as: developing questions, entering the field, establishing rapport, taking and managing field notes, coding data, and data analysis.  Lectures, readings, and class discussion will be complimented by assignments using techniques. Offered as ANTH 339 and ANTH 439.
ANTH 439B	Applying Anthropological Research Methods	1 Unit	This class will provide students with practical experience utilizing the anthropological research methods taught in ANTH 439, Ethnographic and Qualitative Research Methods. With guidance from the instructor, students will plan and implement a preliminary / pilot research project. Prereq: ANTH 439 and Graduate Standing in Anthropology.
ANTH 444	Archaeology of the Ancient World	3 Units	This course examines the great civilizations of the ancient world, particularly those of the Ancient Near East, Egypt, Greece and Rome, through the archaeological record. Each of these geographic areas and their respective cultures will be individually explored, but also examined within a broader historical context. Particular focus will be placed on the social, political, religious, and economic ideas that were exchanged across Mesopotamia, Anatolia, the Levant and the Mediterranean and the influence this interconnectivity had on these ancient societies.  Offered as ANEE 344, ANEE 444, ANTH 344, ANTH 444, ARTH 344, ARTH 444, CLSC 344 and CLSC 444. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANTH 445	Ethnicity, Gender, and Mental Health	3 Units	An overview of mental health status and ethnicity. Analysis of ethnicity in relation to culture, social class, gender, sociopolitical conflict and the world refugee crisis. Consideration of populations at special risk for the development of specific mental disorders (e.g., schizophrenia, affective disorders, adjustment and stress disorders). Contemporary ethnographic survey of ethnic groups at risk both at home and abroad. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102. Offered as ANTH 345 and ANTH 445.
ANTH 447	Cultural Ecology and Sustainability	3 Units	Could the quest of modern society for sustainability, in the face of devastating climate change and massive biodiversity loss that threaten life on Earth as we know it, gain from understanding how other past and present cultures around the world have dealt with sustainability challenges? Are there cultural patterns or clusters of ideas underlying the deleterious actions of modern culture towards the natural world that could be clarified through a comparison with indigenous or traditional cultures, some who lived sustainably for thousands of years and even enhanced the biodiversity of their surrounding environments? If cybernetic and semiotic principles that guide living systems were clarified, would this lead to more ecologically robust ways of engaging with the natural world and resolving contemporary sustainability issues? Is it the essential task of our time to develop and globalize an ecologically, socially, and economically sustainable "beyond modern" definition of human being? Is the global environment decay of our earthly home perhaps a clarion call by nature, compelling our species to integrate the wisdom of traditional knowledge along with the spectacular scientific and technological achievements of modernity if we are to survive? This seminar will explore these questions and more, with a primary objective of enhancing student environmental advocacy along with increasing their depth of experience when interacting with the natural world.  Offered as ANTH 347 and ANTH 447.
ANTH 449	Cultures of Latin America	3 Units	The aim of this course is to consider cultural diversity and social inequality in contemporary Latin America from an anthropological perspective.  A variety of aspects related to ethnicity, religion, music, gender, social movements, cuisine, urban spaces, violence, and ecology are considered in addition to current economic and political issues.  These topics will be analyzed in relation to Latin America's complex historical and social formation and its identity representations.  The course takes under consideration various case studies in which not just local communities but also perceptions of national institutions and practices will be analyzed from pluralistic approaches (provided by either Latin American and non-Latin American researchers) that combine fieldwork, interviews and life experiences with textual and media sources.  Special attention will be paid to contemporary global issues affecting Latin America. Offered as ANTH 349 and ANTH 449. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANTH 453	Chinese Culture and Society	3 Units	Focuses on Chinese cultural and social institutions during the Maoist and post-Maoist eras.  Topics include ideology, economics, politics, religion, family life, and popular culture. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102. Offered as ANTH 353 and ANTH 453. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
ANTH 454	Health and Healing in East Asia	3 Units	This course examines the illness experiences and the healing practices in East Asia. After introducing the anthropological approaches to the study of medicine, this course will explore the practices of ethnomedicine and biomedicine, mental health, family planning and reproductive health, the experience of aging and care giving, infectious disease, environmental health, and biotechnology. By delving into the illness experiences and the healing practices in East Asia, the course will discuss issues related to medical pluralism, health inequality, biological citizenship, social stigmatization, and bioethics. Offered as ANTH 354 and ANTH 454. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Graduate Standing.
ANTH 455	Paleodiet(s)?	Understanding Food and Diet Past and Present	3 Units	The Paleodiet promotes to the public the notion that humans evolved to eat one single diet; that is far from the truth.  In this class, we will learn about the evolution of our diets and nutrition, the diversity of human diets over time and space, the relationship of diet to health, and the methods biological anthropologists use to scientifically study diet.  Expect to learn about early human diets right up to modern diets. Additionally, this course will focus on how to read and interpret scientific papers/concepts, as well as how to construct a scientific argument.  Students will apply those skills by giving a presentation to classmates following the structure of scientific meetings. Offered as ANTH 355 and ANTH 455.
ANTH 459	Introduction to Global Health	3 Units	This course is an introduction to the field of international and global health from the perspective of anthropology. Key health problems in the world are identified and anthropological research on these issues is presented and examined. The course covers current international and global health issues and reviews the history of anthropological engagement in the field. Case studies of current health issues will be discussed. Offered as ANTH 359 and ANTH 459.
ANTH 460	Global Politics of Reproduction	3 Units	This course offers an anthropological examination of reproductive politics around the world. It explores historical, cultural, socioeconomic, political, and technological factors contributing to reproductive activities. After introducing the anthropological approaches to the study of reproduction, the course will delve into the ways to regulate reproduction in historical and contemporary times, various factors contributing to fertility change, state intervention in reproduction, and assisted reproductive technologies.  Offered as ANTH 360, ANTH 460, and WGST 360. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Graduate Standing.
ANTH 462	Contemporary Theory in Anthropology	3 Units	A critical examination of anthropological thought in England, France and the United States during the second half of the twentieth century.  Emphasis will be on the way authors formulate questions that motivate anthropological discourse, on the way central concepts are formulated and applied and on the controversies and debates that result.  Readings are drawn from influential texts by prominent contemporary anthropologists. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102. Offered as ANTH 362 and ANTH 462.
ANTH 465	Gender and Sex Differences: Cross-cultural Perspective	3 Units	Gender roles and sex differences throughout the life cycle considered from a cross-cultural perspective. Major approaches to explaining sex roles discussed in light of information from both Western and non-Western cultures.  Offered as ANTH 365, ANTH 465 and WGST 365.
ANTH 466	Population Change: Problems and Solutions	3 Units	The course examines population processes and their social consequences from an anthropological perspective. It introduces basic concepts and theories of population studies and demonstrates the ways in which anthropological research contributes to our understanding of population issues. We will explore questions such as: How has world population changed in history? How does a population age or grow younger? What are the factors affecting population health? Why do people migrate? And what are the policy implications of population change? We will examine the sociocultural, economic, political, and ecological factors contributing to population processes, such as factors affecting childbearing decisions, cultural context of sex-selective abortion, various caregiving arrangements for the elderly, and policy responses to population change. We will explore these issues with cases from across the world, with a special focus on China, the world's most populous country with the most massive family-planning program in modern human history. Offered as ANTH 366 and ANTH 466. Prereq: Graduate standing.
ANTH 467	Topics in Evolutionary Biology	3 Units	The focus for this course on a special topic of interest in evolutionary biology will vary from one offering to the next. Examples of possible topics include theories of speciation, the evolution of language, the evolution of sex, evolution and biodiversity, molecular evolution. ANAT/ANTH/EEPS/PHIL/PHOL 467/BIOL 468 will require a longer, more sophisticated term paper, and additional class presentation. Offered as ANTH 367, BIOL 368, EEPS 367, PHIL 367, ANAT 467, ANTH 467, BIOL 468, EEPS 467, PHIL 467 and PHOL 467.
ANTH 471	Culture, Behavior, and Person: Psychological Anthropology	3 Units	Cross-cultural perspectives on personality, human development, individual variability, cognition, deviant behavior, and the role of the individual in his/her society. Classic and contemporary anthropological writings on Western and non-Western societies. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102. Offered as ANTH 371 and ANTH 471.
ANTH 472	Anthropological Approaches to Religion	3 Units	The development of, and current approaches to, comparative religion from an anthropological perspective.  Topics include witchcraft, ritual, myth, healing, religious language and symbolism, religion and gender, religious experience, the nature of the sacred, religion and social change, altered states of consciousness, and evil.  Using material from a wide range of world cultures, critical assessment is made of conventional distinctions such as those between rational/irrational, natural/supernatural, magic/religion, and primitive/civilized. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102. Offered as ANTH 372, RLGN 372 and ANTH 472.
ANTH 476	Topics in the Anthropology of Health and Medicine	3 Units	Special topics of interest, such as the biology of human adaptability; the ecology of the human life cycle health delivery systems; transcultural psychiatry; nutrition, health, and disease; paleoepidemiology; and population anthropology. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102 or ANTH 103. Offered as ANTH 376 and ANTH 476.
ANTH 479	Topics in Cultural and Social Anthropology	3 Units	Special topics of interest across the range of social and cultural anthropology. Recommended preparation: ANTH 102. Offered as ANTH 379 and ANTH 479.
ANTH 480	Medical Anthropology and Global Health I	3 Units	The first in a sequence of two graduate core courses in medical anthropology and global health.  This course focuses on foundational concepts and theories in medical anthropology, as well as topical areas which have been central to the development of the field. Prereq: Graduate Standing in Anthropology.
ANTH 480B	Medical Anthropology and Global Health I Recitation	1 Unit	ANTH 480B serves as a complement to ANTH 480 (Medical Anthropology and Global Health I).  There are two primary goals.  The first goal is to provide additional time to review, discuss, and integrate through discussion and additional readings topics covered in ANTH 480.  This will better prepare students for both course exams and the MA Qualifying Exam, as well as meeting stated student interests in expanded opportunities to engage with graduate student colleagues about contemporary anthropological research.   The second goal is to support students in building their professional identity as anthropologists and to enhance professional development through specific skill-building. Coreq: ANTH 480.  Prereq: Anthropology Graduate Student.
ANTH 481	Medical Anthropology and Global Health II	3 Units	The second in a sequence of two graduate core courses in medical anthropology and global health.  This course focuses on the application of medical anthropology theory and methods to the study of global health. Recommended preparation: ANTH 480. Prereq: Graduate Standing in Anthropology.
ANTH 481B	Medical Anthropology and Global Health II Recitation	1 Unit	ANTH 481B  serves as a complement to ANTH 481 (Medical Anthropology and Global Health II).  The goal of the course is to provide additional time to review, discuss, and integrate through discussion and additional readings topics covered in ANTH 481.  This will better prepare students for both course exams and the MA Qualifying Exam, as well as meeting stated student interests in expanded opportunities to engage with graduate student colleagues about contemporary anthropological research. Prereq: Graduate Standing in Anthropology.
ANTH 482	Anthropological and Ecological Perspectives on Preserving and Restoring the Natural World	3 Units	Now that the environmentally deleterious effects of modern Western culture on the natural world have reached major proportions it has become crucial to explore innovative solutions to this dilemma.  In this course novel perspectives derived from the intersection of anthropology and ecology are discussed.  The primary perspective focused upon is the understanding that human culture and the natural world in which it is embedded are essentially communicative, or semiotic processes, which thrive upon diverse interaction and feedback.  Preserving and restoring the Natural World thus shifts from protecting individual species and particular cultural practices to enhancing the communicative matrix of life and multiple cultural views of the environment.  Through this understanding, students will learn to apply a more elegant, effective, and aesthetically pleasing perspective to the challenging environmental issues facing our contemporary world.  An in-depth examination of the North American Prairie, along with a comparison of influences on the landscape by indigenous and modern Western Culture will serve as the particular region of focus. Offered as ANTH 382 and ANTH 482. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
ANTH 485	Applied Anthropology	3 Units	This class will provide students with an overview of how anthropologists put theories, methods, and findings to use in addressing social issues and problems.  Applied projects presented will span a diverse range of topics and fields, including: healthcare and medicine, nutrition, international development, displacement of populations, education, as well projects from business and industry. Class discussion will address orientations of and advantages in applied approaches, as well the ethical questions such projects often encounter. Offered as ANTH 385 and ANTH 485.
ANTH 504	Anthropological Research Design	3 Units	Practical and theoretical issues in the selection of questions for health and aging research in societal settings. Illustration of frameworks and designs for research. Discussion of the problems of collection, analysis, and interpretation of data along with the nonscientific influences on the research process and the use of results. Prereq: Graduate standing in anthropology.
ANTH 511	Seminar in Anthropology and Global Health: Topics	3 Units	This course examines the current issues in global health and the emerging anthropological paradigm directed at global health issues.  The objective of the course is to provide graduate students in medical anthropology an in-depth examination of global health from several perspectives.  The course will feature perspectives from anthropologists as well as others working in the fields of global health. Prereq: Graduate standing in Anthropology.
ANTH 513	Seminar in Ethnopsychiatry	3 Units	Theory and practice of psychotherapeutic forms. Diagnostic and therapeutic forms from Europe, the United States, Japan, India, and other major cultural traditions and those of local areas such as West Africa, Native America, and Latin America. The cultural theories of mental disorders, related conceptions of self and person, and the relationships of local psychological theory to clinical praxis and outcome.
ANTH 530	Seminar in Medical Anthropology: Topics	3 Units	Various topics will be offered for graduate students in medical anthropology, such as "Anthropological Perspectives on Women's Health and Reproduction" and "Biocultural Anthropology." Prereq: ANTH 480.
ANTH 599	Tutorial: Advanced Studies in Anthropology	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)  Advanced studies in anthropology.
ANTH 601	Independent Research	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
ANTH 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
FSSY 117	Science and Literature	4 Units	This course explores the treatment of scientific themes and the depiction of scientists in literature. This is not a course about science fiction: instead of envisioning future scientific advancements, Science in Literature pays close attention to the ways in which literary texts comment upon ongoing scientific debates and responds to the questionings of science. This four-credit-hour course also provides an introduction to various dimensions of academic life. It will be characterized by intense yet open-ended intellectual inquiry. Throughout the semester, we will foreground critical reading, thoughtful analysis, as well as written and oral communication.
FSSY 135	The Rest is Silence	4 Units	The purpose of this course is to examine a widespread yet under-examined agent of the symbolic world: silence. Without the delimiting, shaping power of silence, language would be a lump of indistinguishable sound. The title of the course comes from Shakespeare: specifically, Hamlet's last words. As we know, the rest (of Hamlet) isn't silence: the play goes on for many more lines, beginning with Horatio's well known valediction, "Now cracks a noble heart. Good night sweet prince:/And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!" Hamlet's last words give us a good view into the ambiguous nature of silence, the strange entanglement it has with boundaries, both formal, and metaphysical. We will study how silence is imbricated in different, even antithetical, practices: in the articulation of creative forms (with special attention to poetry); in methods of religious contemplation and meditation; as agent of ecological and political suppression; as sensory deprivation, or form of torture. Silence continuously challenges and reorients our symbolic projects. As Ana Maria Ochoa Gautier argues, it forces us to question "the binary logic of apparent opposites by dissolving one into the other (presence as absence, emptiness as plenitude, quietness as expressivity, silence as intensity of life)." What we can know or say about silence will emerge from an ongoing discussion of texts that engage its properties--its paradoxes--differently. Our semester-long study (and practice) of silence will draw on your powers of critical inquiry, reflection, and synthesis, as well as your powers of attention and imagination. Seminar-style discussion and writing are the cornerstones of the course, which is designed to help you locate yourself in the surrounding structures and expectations of the academic community, especially its forms of conversation and writing. My hope is that as you explore and refine your relationship with silence, you will begin to identify and conserve it as an important resource in your academic life: as a refuge from information overload, as a ground for ethical decision-making, and as a guide to precision in speech and writing.
FSSY 154	The Imagination Project	4 Units	For the first years of our schooling, we are taught to play make-believe. Then, we are taught to understand facts. Whatever happened to the imagination? What is it? What are the theories that help to explain it? And what is its place at a research university? In this class, we will read, talk, think, and write about the purposes and scope of the human imagination, which is often understood as the symbolic realm of images and ideas that exists as part of our mental life. We will look at how the imagination has been understood by various thinkers and artists, and we will consider how the physical world interacts with the imagination in stories, music, film, and scientific ideas. Even though we may think that imagination means "something from nothing," it is much more complicated and collaborative than that, as we will see in our examination of larger imaginative projects such as the Sistine Chapel, Star Wars, Legos, and Disney World. We will examine the role of the imagination in as many disciplines as possible, including physics, sports, fantasy, politics, and the media. As we interrogate these sources, we will learn the basic tenets of argument and research that will help you in your upcoming SAGES courses. Are there imaginative practices that can help us succeed here at Case? How can we turn our own imaginations into reality?
FSSY 157	Pursuits of Happiness	4 Units	What is Happiness?  And why do Americans consider its pursuit a self-evident, inalienable right?  To what extent is happiness a component of the American Dream?  How have writers used stories to illustrate the possibilities and limits of this ideal? This course examines the various ways that thinkers have defined happiness, using both theoretical frameworks and literary examples.  Students will carefully analyze the validity and utility of these models, selecting elements to construct their own personal philosophies of happiness.
FSSY 162	The Mind of the Warrior	4 Units	This seminar intends to provide students with an understanding of the origins and representation of traditional martial arts through movies, novels, and comics. We will emphasize the moral, historical, and cognitive issues involved in the practice of these older fighting techniques. We will also examine how practitioners might have been forced to compromise some of their tenets to accommodate contemporary life and a broader audience.
FSSY 175	God and the American Writer	4 Units	How have American poets, novelists, and essayists thought about God? Do they have anything to teach us about the role of religious belief in a country where religious believers make up the statistical majority? What could a late nineteenth century poet possibly teach us about the ways Americans experience religious belief today? How could a fictional novel help us better understand the unique cultural history of religious belief in the US and its influence on today's society?  This course seeks to address these questions by considering a particular strain of American writing that highly values the role of personal experience in religious faith. For these writers, God is not a philosophical idea hidden away in the abstractions of erudition, or a historical curiosity to be studied alongside ancient civilizations, but something to be experienced in an intense and personal way. For one writer God is the "Tender Pioneer" who Americans would be cowardly not to venture after. Another writer claims that the previous "generations beheld God and nature face to face;" he encourages his readers to ignore others' opinions and to seek their own "original relation with the universe." Another proclaims that Americans profess "to love God whom they have not seen, while they hate their brother whom they have seen." What similarities do these ideas share--what differences separate them?  We will use these and other ideas to begin a conversation about why the personal experience of God seems so vital to America writers. We will discuss the ways American writers have created and critiqued the religious value of individuality, as well as how the category of "personal experience" can both hinder and help us in understanding American culture.
FSSY 177	Cosmic Horror	4 Units	Cosmic Horror is the literary genre that most powerfully wrestles with the question of humanity's place in the universe as revealed by modern science. From its shadowy beginnings in the pulp fiction magazines of the nineteen twenties and thirties, Cosmic Horror has come to occupy the center of contemporary literary culture. Prominent philosophers, ecologists, writers, and programmers have taken inspiration from the genre as they seek to discover meaning in a universe no longer centered on humanity. These works explore a physical world indifferent to human life and human meaning, a world in which human action shrivels into insignificance when faced with the abysses of cosmic temporal and spatial scales. In reading writers such as H. P. Lovecraft and Octavia Butler, and philosophers and scientists such as Eugene Thacker and Carlo Rovelli, we will focus on several key questions. How does "cosmic" horror differ from other kinds of terror? What traditions, beliefs, or practices does modern science threaten for these writers? Why have so many thinkers from diverse fields found themselves drawn to these works in recent years? What resources do these works offer for making sense of the environmental crisis?  This class, like other First Seminars, is writing-intensive and will follow the seminar format. It is characterized by intense yet open-ended intellectual inquiry, guided by reading from primary as well as secondary sources. This interdisciplinary course (investigating intersections of literature, philosophy, psychology, and science) will help you recognize the different perspectives that can be used to enter into a discussion on a subject, and enable you to make sometimes surprising connections across different fields, times, and genres.
FSSY 182	Mystery and the Art of Storytelling	4 Units	It's hard to resist a good story, and even harder to resist a good mystery story. What is it about mysteries that makes them so enduringly fascinating, so universal? What might they teach us about the nature of storytelling itself? In this course we'll discuss and write about how narrative works, taking mystery as our guide. In doing so, we'll also become better readers, viewers, and interpreters. For these stories make detectives out of us all, demanding that we evaluate textual evidence, seek out rhetorical clues, pay keen attention to detail, and even examine our own frameworks of perception. Engaging both classic and less traditional tales of mystery and detection (including a movie or two), we'll examine the logic of such narratives, the desires and fears that drive them, and the secrets they tell--or try to keep hidden.
FSSY 183	E-Lit	New Media Narrative	4 Units	Imagine a book we might read by touching the words, choosing among possible paths or endings, or even by allowing our own faces or voices to be part of the scene.  Electronic literature, that is, literary works designed to be read or experienced on a computer, often requires exactly such multisensory engagement, asking readers to make unusual connections between words, images, sounds, or movement, and, sometimes, to put themselves into the story.  In this class, we will read, experience, and write critically about electronic literature and experimental print literature, including works of interactive fiction, digital documentary, blogs, cut up and computer-generated poetry, digital games, and geo-locative fiction.  The works we read present unfamiliar, often non-linear, modes of writing, storytelling, or of conveying information.  Such texts give us insight into how we "read" and how digital spaces influence the way we understand, experience, and respond to ideas, places, and people.
FSSY 185B	Jazz Attitudes	4 Units	Despised by the church, reviled by New Orleans society, Jazz was the bad boy music of the early 20th century.  But by WWII it was the most popular music style in the US. Since then, jazz has become a minority taste, embraced by the academy, but viewed with an intimidated indifference by the general public. How did this happen? How have views of this odd marriage of European and African musical styles changed through the years?  Can jazz regain relevancy? Should jazz musicians even care about relevancy? And if not, what does the future hold for them and their music? In this course, we will examine the history of the development of jazz, what makes the music so important in American culture, and some of the reasons why--despite this importance--few people listen to it anymore. Students need not have prior familiarity with jazz, only a willingness to listen to, and read about, the music.
FSSY 185D	Medieval Mindsets	4 Units	Do we get to be modern without first getting medieval? This seminar revisits and reexamines medieval modes of thinking and making. Over the course of the semester, we will sample literary and material artifacts left behind by the medieval world. We will reconsider our obligations to the past and its stuff, are we responsible for/to medieval things and, if so, to what degree? We will take a hands-on approach to our objects of study. Working in special collections and museums, with curators and artists, we will learn to decode medieval archives and artifacts. Together, we will put medieval mindsets to the test.
FSSY 185E	Literary Servants	From Homer to Harry Potter	4 Units	Servants have played a surprisingly large role in some of the great works of Western literature, though they often get overlooked in favor of their more noble masters and employers. In "The Odyssey," for example, when Odysseus returns from the Trojan War after 20 years at sea, he first gets recognized, not by his son or his wife, but by a childhood nurse who has served in his household all of his life. Shakespearean-era plays also place servants in surprisingly central roles, having them not only performing tasks for their masters, but sometimes acting as romantic interests and close friends, or emblems of moral behavior. Servants have taken on the role of primary protagonists in many works of 19th- and 20th-century literature, and have played an outsized role in countless other works. Some of the questions that we will ask in this class include: Why do these characters--who occupy the margins of the household and often perform seemingly mundane jobs--play this role in the literary and social imagination? Do servants have unique identities, interests, and value systems or do they adopt the identities and values of the people they serve? To what extent are servants needed to establish the social positions of patriarchs, monarchs and the wealthy? The class will also explore the forms of power that servants are able to exert over those that they serve, and the extent to which this power both complicates and reinforces more commonly recognized systems of inequality like race, class and gender. Readings will include several classic works of literature, and short philosophical works on human rights and the politics of the lower classes. We will also read some philosophical discussions of class and social hierarchy, watch and discuss some film and television representations of service, and visit the Cleveland Museum of Art and the Cleveland Historical Society in order to learn about the history of domestic service.
FSSY 185H	Shakespeare and Violence	4 Units	Today, Shakespeare's name is synonymous with high art. Attending a performance of one of his plays can be as formal as going to the symphony or to the opera. Yet, in his own time, many people were drawn to Shakespeare's plays because they were an exciting, gruesome spectacle, with eye gouging, cannibalism, and murder depicted on-stage to the shock (and delight) of the audience. Everybody agrees that Shakespeare's plays can be violent, but what does Shakespeare actually have to say about violence in the "real" world? As we will consider this semester, Shakespeare interrogates many of the same questions regarding the use of violence that are reflected upon today. When should a nation-state attack another? When should citizens revolt against their own government? How should crime be punished? How do we know when a romantic relationship has become abusive? And, finally, what is an artist's responsibility when representing violence? Do theatrical performances of violence inevitably glorify actual acts of violence? Can a play be both gruesome and great? In this class, we will consider contemporary, critical examinations of these questions alongside examples from Shakespeare's drama, exploring the ways in which Shakespeare's treatment of violence relates to our own world. Students will engage these issues in a variety of formats, including traditional writing assignments, presentations, and in a final group "performance," in which they interpret a Shakespearean text.
FSSY 185K	The Greek and Roman Humanities	4 Units	The civilizations that developed in ancient Greece and ancient Italy are called collectively "Classical Civilization." The study of the Greek and Roman humanities (languages, literature, arts, history, and philosophy) is known as "Classics."  The Greeks and Romans have had a profound, widespread, and long-lasting influence on many aspects of subsequent Western Civilization, so studying the Classical Humanities is not only a rewarding endeavor in itself, but also can benefit those who want a deeper understanding of the modern arts and humanities. In this seminar we will read and discuss representative works by Greek and Roman authors in translation and look at artifacts produced in the ancient world in order to come to a better understanding of the foundations of the western humanities. We will also study the impact of Greek and Latin on English in order to understand how language can shape thought--an important thing to learn for anyone who is also trying to become a better writer!  The seminar will investigate numerous questions about Classics. Where were the Classical lands? When was the Classical period? Are there connections between Greece or Rome and other ancient civilizations? What were the sounds and sights of Greece and Rome? What remains of the ancient world in terms of language, literature, the arts? How have the Classical Humanities shaped modern concepts and institutions? Where can one find tangible influences of Greek and Roman civilization in modern America?  Why and when have modern people turned to Greece and Rome for inspiration?
FSSY 185N	Sacred Space in Monotheistic Religious Traditions	4 Units	A significant dilemma facing all three of the major monotheistic religious traditions - Judaism, Christianity and Islam - is how to establish a sacred space on earth for the worship of a deity which cannot be contained. In many ways, architectural and artistic decisions about the location, internal layout, orientation and other features of such sacred spaces reflect deep presuppositions in each religion about the divine and how worship is to be performed in a human context. In what ways do these spaces inspire awe, demand obedience, offer comfort, or teach lessons? How have these spaces inherited features from other times and places, and how have these features changed (or not)?  To examine how one might understand and interpret such spaces, we will visit religious buildings in the University Circle area and its surroundings.
FSSY 185O	Encountering the Uncanny	4 Units	Have you ever experienced déjà vu? Or, have you stepped into a room and felt as though it was a little too quiet? Have you ever mistaken a stranger for a close friend or relative? Are you creeped out by extremely life-like dolls or robots? If so, you may have felt a sense of the unsettling combination of familiarity and strangeness known as the uncanny. Most of us have experienced the uncanny at one time or another, yet psychologists, philosophers, literary critics, and scientists have been unable to fully explain how or why it happens. In this seminar, we will explore this interdisciplinary conversation, reading analyses of the uncanny by figures such as Sigmund Freud and the roboticist Masahiro Mori, and by exploring its representation in literature, contemporary art, and horror films. Why has the uncanny intrigued so many thinkers? Is one academic discipline better suited to exploring the uncanny than others? Most importantly, what can we learn about ourselves when we study the uncanny? By looking closely at examples of the uncanny, we will attempt to unearth the personal and cultural anxieties at the root of this experience of fear or unease.
FSSY 185P	On the Road in America	4 Units	Travel and exploration have long occupied a central role in the American imagination. The idea of the frontier, and the great westward expansion, gave birth to national myths and narratives based on transit and adventure. In recent years, Americans have continued to reflect on the significance of physical journeys, as well as the inner quests that often accompany these modern-day pilgrimages. In this course, we will examine a diverse set of works that explore the long-standing American romance with adventure and movement. We will consider the impact of the open road on America's national identity, the powerful emotions and spiritual longing that lead people onto the road, and the forces that drive them off it.
FSSY 185Q	Death, Mourning, and Immortality	4 Units	Although death and loss always have been part of the human experience, poems aching for immortality and mourning losses were especially important to people before the development of modern medicine because of the omnipresence of death in daily life. Poems mourning losses were frequently (but not always) about death, and so we will occasionally consider what it means to mourn a still-living hero or to mourn the passing of a moment in time. A poem can become a "moment's monument" in one apt description. In this seminar, we will examine poetry from the seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries to explore the variety of ways that writers' religious beliefs, gender and sexual identities, and attitudes about desire and emotion informed how they thought about death, loss, mourning, and immortality. How does this poetry represent sadness and despair? In what ways does it affirm the joys of life and the memory of what has been lost? To supplement our investigation, we will also explore expressions of mourning that can be found in other genres of literature, as well as in museums and cemeteries. We will think about what it means to write yourself or others into immortality. No prior experience studying poetry is necessary, only a willingness to read with care and think with an open mind.
FSSY 185R	Children's Picture Books	4 Units	Picture books may teach young readers basics like how to read, what sounds animals make, and how to count to ten, but they also shape children's perceptions of the world around them and influence the way they see themselves. In this seminar, we will study how children's picture books communicate social norms and ethics through the depiction of people and places. We will explore questions including: What kinds of places and spaces do picture books depict? How do characters treat others in these places, and how do they interact with non-human objects and the natural environment? Whose voices are heard and whose are silenced in the stories and pictures? Even though these books are written for children, what do they tell us about the adults who create, buy, or read them? How do these older readers understand children's spaces and childhood? By examining the underlying messages in these deceptively simple books, we can uncover surprisingly complicated visions of the world.
FSSY 185U	Conceptions of the Self	4 Units	This seminar explores religious and philosophical views about what it means to be human. We will address questions such as: to what extent are we free? Does freedom conflict with traditional authority, our own pasts, our irrational impulses, or our physical natures? What is the relationship between reason and emotion? How well do we know our own motives? And to what extent are we hidden to ourselves? To investigate these questions, we will read, discuss, and write about a range of classical and contemporary religious and philosophical thinkers. Each offers a different perspective about the nature of the human being, human excellence, and what it means to live a life of integrity. They are also enduringly relevant to our lives, inside and outside of the classroom. Together, the texts and thinkers constitute a conversation filled with sometimes competing and sometimes complementary views about who we are, why we do the things we do, and what sorts of lives we ought to lead.
FSSY 185V	Supernatural Encounters in Fantasy: Medieval and Contemporary	4 Units	Works of fantasy imagine interactions between humans and other beings. They also present the metamorphosis of humans into other forms. Studying these stories gives us insight into different conceptions of what constitutes the human, perceptions of superiority and inferiority, and opportunities for connections across boundaries. This course examines medieval and contemporary works that engage with these issues and others. Are certain attributes reserved for humans or the other beings in these fantasies? Are such differences in traits stable or do they change within individual works, over time or across societies? What cultural tensions arise within these narratives when characters seek to marry someone outside of their own group? Where do we see continuity or change over time in these narrative dynamics? What does the representation of monsters tell us about the anxieties of the cultures that produced them? We will explore these questions through texts such as Beowulf, other medieval love and adventure stories, and several contemporary works, potentially including fiction by J.R.R. Tolkien, N.K. Jemisin, and Neil Gaiman, and films by Andre Ovredahl and Hayao Miyazaki. This set of works will enable us to focus on strands of the fantastic which engage with themes such as the opposition between humans and the supernatural, the attraction between humans and the supernatural, and forms of heroism.
FSSY 185W	The Body in Art, Literature, and Medicine from Antiquity to Today	4 Units	We take our bodies for granted. In some circumstances, the body is a source of joy and wonder. In others, it is a source of suffering. In all cases, it is one of the few things that all people have in common. This seminar will focus on what we conceive the body to be and how our ideas about the body have changed over time, in different fields, and depending on different artistic, scientific, social, and political circumstances. In doing so, we will consider the ways in which our cultural attitudes shape and are shaped by representations of the body, and we question whether anything can be said for sure about what our bodies mean to us. Methodologically, we will consider these subjects primarily through readings in aesthetic theory from ancient and modern sources, in addition to readings in medical history and religion. Our "texts" for the course will also include exhibitions at the Cleveland Museum of Art and Dittrick Museum of Medical History, dance performances, films, poetry, and lyric essays. (While many of our sources will be drawn from so-called "Western Civilization," every attempt will be made to broaden our understanding of the body across cultures and across the spectrum of ability.) In this way, we will develop a deep understanding of the historical and cultural contexts in which we view the body, which will also help us to critically examine the ways that we currently frame and understand the body.
FSSY 185Y	Weird Fictions	4 Units	Most of us love to settle in with a reliably entertaining novel or movie. We can usually count on such stories to provide relatable characters, coherent plots, satisfying conclusions, and not to make us think too hard after a long day. But there are different, arguably deeper pleasures to be found in stories that are weird: the kind that challenge our minds and subvert our expectations. Such fictions tend to play around with more familiar modes of narration, often bending time and space, form and content, reality and illusion. Even the most discerning film buffs can't agree, for instance, whether the first or the second half of Mulholland Drive (2001) occurs in the dreams of a character who exists in the "realer" half. (Or whether neither half can claim priority and "the real dreamer is elsewhere," as one critic has suggestively put it.) Works like these empower us, as readers and viewers, to become active participants in interpreting or even constructing the stories they present. In this seminar you'll discuss and write about a diverse range of weird stories and films, taking their innovations and ambiguities as occasions to hone your skills as a reader, writer, and thinker. More broadly, these fictions will give you ample occasion to reflect critically on the kinds of stories we all tell ourselves and others, narratives that provide a sense of meaning and coherence, even when they can't quite be trusted.
FSSY 186D	Narratives of Migration	4 Units	Why do people migrate and what is the impact of the circumstances and context of such moves? How do they write about moving to new locations, leaving their old home and arriving at a new one? In this seminar we explore patterns of human migration, the political and cultural significance of such movement and they ways in which people narrate their experience. In exploring many kinds of migration, we consider multilingualism and translation, identity, borders, and cultural encounters and differences, topics that continue to pervade our public discourse. We will dedicate the first part of the seminar to examining a variety of reasons and contexts in which people migrate, and the implications of terms like immigration, asylum and exile. Then, in the second part of the seminar, we will apply these questions to one particular site, the United States, and consider its history and politics of migration. Examples might include texts written by the early migration of the puritans juxtaposed with the forced migration of slaves; writers who grew up in multi-lingual families grappling with their fraught relationship to the English language; and current discussions of the U.S.-Mexico border and immigration policies. Our sources include literary texts, historical and legal documents, journalistic writing, personal narratives and film. We discuss these readings and the choices made in them in terms of tone, word choice, audience and more, and use them to formulate our own critical ideas on topics such as home, belonging and navigating cultural differences.
FSTS 100	SAGES Transfer Supplement	1 Unit	This one-credit course is designed for transfer students who have met the expository writing requirement with grades of C or higher at their previous college or university.  In lieu of repeating First Seminar, these students will participate in activities that engage them in Case's unique cultural and intellectual environment in University Circle.
FRCH 101	Elementary French I	4 Units	Emphasizes conversational skills. Students are expected to achieve control of sound system and basic sentence structures of French. Students must complete assignments at the Online Language Learning Center in addition to attending scheduled class meetings.
FRCH 102	Elementary French II	4 Units	Continuation of FRCH 101. Recommended preparation: FRCH 101.
FRCH 201	Intermediate French I	4 Units	Intensive review of grammar and usage through readings, discussions and other activities that emphasize contemporary French life. Students must complete assignments at the Online Language Learning Center in addition to attending scheduled class meetings. Recommended preparation: FRCH 102 or equivalent.
FRCH 202	Intermediate French II	4 Units	A continuation of FRCH 201, the course focuses on the acquisition of intermediate-level skills in language and culture. Students must complete assignments at the Online Language Learning Center in addition to attending scheduled class meetings.  Recommended preparation: FRCH 201 or equivalent.
FRCH 208	The Montreal Experience	1 Unit	One-week immersion learning experience performing community service in Montreal, Canada. Students meet several times for orientation before spending spring break in French-speaking Montreal. Community service may include volunteering in a homeless center, a hospital, or school. Application available from Department office. This course may be repeated once. Permit required. Prereq or Coreq: FRCH 202 or equivalent.
FRCH 295	The Francophone World	3 Units	The course offers an introduction to the Francophone World from a historical, cultural, and literary perspective. The Francophone World includes countries and regions around the globe with a substantial French-speaking population (and where French is sometimes, but not always, an official language): North America (Louisiana, Quebec, and Acadia); North Africa (Tunisia, Morocco, Algeria, and Egypt); the Middle-East (Lebanon, Syria); the Caribbean (Martinique, Guadeloupe, Haiti); Southeast Asia (Vietnam); and Europe (France, Belgium, Switzerland, and Luxembourg). FRCH 295 provides a comprehensive overview of the Francophone World, while focusing on a particular area or areas in any given semester. Offered as AFST 295, ETHS 295, FRCH 295, and WLIT 295. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
FRCH 308	Immigration and the Paris Experience	3 Units	Three-week immersion learning experience living and studying in Paris. The focus of the course is the culture, literature, and the arts of the African, Arab, and Asian communities of Paris. At least half of the course looks at issues surrounding immigration that affect women in particular. Students spend a minimum of fifteen hours per week visiting cultural centers and museums and interviewing authors and students about the immigrant experience. Assigned readings complement course activities. Students enrolled in FRCH 308/408 do coursework in French. WLIT 308/408, ETHS 308, and WGST 308 students have the option of completing coursework in English. Graduate students have additional course requirements. Offered as FRCH 308, WLIT 308, ETHS 308, WGST 308, FRCH 408, and WLIT 408. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: FRCH 202.
FRCH 309	French for Diplomacy and International Relations	3 Units	French for Diplomacy is an upper-level course with a focus on learning the linguistic and socio-cultural competency specific to the professions associated with diplomacy and international relations within the Francophone world. The course will outline the characteristics of European institutions and will focus on interpersonal and social relations necessary for working within them. In this course, students will develop their communication and comprehension skills through oral and written activities in the context of authentic situations of negotiations, thematic presentations and reports including missions and projects. Some examples of themes covered are negotiations in the professional world, economics, social and human rights, finance, education, peacekeeping and ecology. Finally, whenever possible, the course will be complemented by cultural exchanges in conjunction with programs featured by the French Consulate in Chicago. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity. This course prepares students for the French for Professions Diploma (DFP, Diplômes de Français Professionnel) in International Relations offered by the French Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Paris. Students may undertake the DFP on a voluntary basis. Students must pay a nominal fee for certification testing. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: FRCH 202.
FRCH 310	Advanced Composition and Reading	3 Units	An initiation to the literature of Francophone expression with a focus on close reading. Texts may include short stories, essays, and novels.  Students engage in the discussion of their readings and learn how to express their ideas both orally and in written form. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: FRCH 202 or equivalent.
FRCH 311	Advanced Conversation I	3 Units	Designed to enhance pronunciation, speaking and listening-comprehension through the discussion of French literature and media for children.  Required for Teacher Licensure candidates. Prereq: FRCH 202 or equivalent.
FRCH 312	Advanced Conversation II	3 Units	A functional approach to conversation.  Students work to develop fluency in spoken French using current colloquial vocabulary and focusing on current issues.  Practice in using speech appropriate to a variety of situations, including public debates. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: FRCH 202 or equivalent.
FRCH 313	Medical French	3 Units	Medical French is an upper-level course with a focus on health care in France and other Francophone countries. Students gain knowledge of the health care structures of various Francophone countries, as well as the vocabulary used in professional medical communication.  Special emphasis on Doctors without Borders (Medecins sans frontieres).  There will be visits to local hospitals and health care sites.  Press articles, media reports, films, videos, and short literary texts are used as resources. Offered as FRCH 313 and FRCH 413. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: FRCH 202 or equivalent.
FRCH 314	Translation Techniques	3 Units	Contrastive grammar analysis and stylistics are used to foster linguistic awareness and to introduce students to the methods and skills of translation. Recommended preparation: FRCH 310. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: FRCH 202.
FRCH 315	French for Business	3 Units	Business French is an upper-level course with a focus on the economic life of France and other Francophone countries. In this course, students will enhance their comprehension and communications skills through oral and written activities in the context of authentic situations of negotiations as related to the economic structures and the business organization of Francophone countries. Some examples of themes covered are negotiations in the professional world, economics, social rights, finance, and business and commercial contexts. Finally, whenever possible, the course will be complemented by cultural exchanges in conjunction with programs featured by the French Consulate in Chicago and/or internships in French-speaking companies in the region or abroad. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.  This course prepares students for the French for Professions Diploma (DFP, Diplômes de Français Professionnel) in Business offered by the French Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Paris. Students may undertake the DFP on a voluntary basis. Students must pay a nominal fee for certification testing. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: FRCH 202 or equivalent.
FRCH 316	Contemporary France	3 Units	A study of contemporary France, this course features discussions and lectures on a variety of topics (geography, political and social life, contemporary culture) to develop factual knowledge about France and a sound understanding of current issues as presented in the media. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: FRCH 202 or equivalent.
FRCH 317	French Cinema	3 Units	An exploration of modern France, its images and values as presented in French films. French press reviews are used for discussion. A unique linguistic and cultural immersion. Recommended preparation: FRCH 310. Prereq: FRCH 202.
FRCH 318	The Origins of France	3 Units	Examination through texts, films, and other media of major historical, intellectual, and artistic influences that have shaped the evolution of French civilization. Students will attempt to identify the values and myths that have contributed to the ongoing formation of modern France. Recommended preparation: FRCH 310. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: FRCH 202.
FRCH 319	Modern France	3 Units	A study of France's political, social and cultural history from the French Revolution to World War II, with emphasis on the events, movements, and people that have shaped Modern France. Highly recommended for students of Nineteenth- and Twentieth-Century French culture. Recommended preparation: FRCH 310. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: FRCH 202.
FRCH 320	Introduction to French Literature	3 Units	Taught in French.  An introduction to literary analysis through the study of important works of French literature.  Written assignments are designed to develop skills in close reading, to introduce students to literary terminology in French, and to develop a capacity for clear, precise communication of an argument.  Classes are discussion-based.  Recommended preparation: FRCH 310. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: FRCH 202 or equivalent.
FRCH 328	Science and Technology in France	3 Units	This course is an exploration of the development of science and technology in France, from their rise in the 18th and 19th centuries to their recent renaissance, from both a scientific and a humanities perspective. A significant component will focus on the contributions of women to science in France. Site visits in France will include the Marie Curie laboratory, the Pasteur Institute, and the Museum of Natural History. Readings will come from the fields of history of science, French cultural history, and French literature. Offered as FRCH 328, FRCH 428, WGST 333, WLIT 353 and WLIT 453. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: FRCH 202 or Requisites Not Met permission.
FRCH 337	Women in the Arab World	3 Units	The purpose of this course is twofold: It is a course that allows students an in-depth look at the diverse women who represent a number of cultures in the Arab world in nations from the Mashrek to the Maghreb. The second primary goal of the course is to study such women through the eyes of leading Arab women theorists who have made an impact not only in their own countries, but also on disciplines intersecting with women's studies worldwide. We will study the Arab woman's place in her respective society, in political and economic systems, in education, and in the family. We will also analyze her contributions to art and literature as well as to the sciences. The course will provide an overview of the Arab woman throughout history, from her origins to her place within recent movements within the Arab Spring and other current world events. As Arab women are Muslim, Christian, and Jewish, views of women within these major world religions will also be taken into account as we study the Arab woman as well as religion's impact on culture in the Middle East and in the Maghreb in particular. In the course, we will utilize theoretical texts, but also case studies as well as examples from media and the arts. During the semester, we will take advantage of teleconferencing opportunities between CWRU and two major academic units for Women's Studies in the Arab world: The Institute for Women's Studies in the Arab World (IWSAW) in Beirut, Lebanon, and the University of Jordan's Center for Women's Studies in Amman. Offered as FRCH 337, FRCH 437, ARAB 337, ETHS 337 and WGST 337. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
FRCH 361	Twentieth-Century French Literature	3 Units	A study of representative novelists (e.g., Proust, Gide, Colette, Sartre, Beauvoir) and playwrights (e.g., Claudel, Beckett, Genet) in historical context. Authors, works, and topics may vary. Offered as FRCH 361 and FRCH 461. Prereq or Coreq: FRCH 320.
FRCH 373	The Novel and the Novella	3 Units	A study of narrative fiction focused on either a particular genre (the novel, the short story) or a particular type of novel (psychological novel, realist novel, detective novel), tale (the fantastic tale, the fairytale), or novella. Offered as FRCH 373 and FRCH 473. Prereq or Coreq: FRCH 320.
FRCH 374	Major Writers and Literary Movements	3 Units	In-depth study of the work of a major writer, film director, or intellectual figure; or of a significant literary, intellectual, or artistic movement. Approaches, content, and instructor will vary. Offered as FRCH 374 and FRCH 474. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: FRCH 320.
FRCH 375	Francophone Literature	3 Units	An examination of Francophone literature focused on the problematics of identity within the colonial and post-colonial context. Writers and works may vary. Offered as FRCH 375 and FRCH 475. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq or Coreq: FRCH 320.
FRCH 376	Women Writers	3 Units	An examination of important literary texts by French and Francophone women writers. Critical essays are also studied to introduce historical and theoretical perspectives. Offered as FRCH 376 and FRCH 476. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq or Coreq: FRCH 320.
FRCH 377	Special Topics	3 Units	The special topics course is designed to provide a forum for specific themes or subjects not otherwise covered in the curriculum. Approaches and content will vary. Maximum 6 credits. Offered as FRCH 377 and FRCH 477. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq or Coreq: FRCH 320.
FRCH 396	Senior Capstone - French	3 Units	The Senior Capstone in French in an independent study project chosen in consultation with a capstone advisor.  The capstone project should reflect both the student's interest within French and/or Francophone Studies and the courses he or she has taken to fulfill the major.  The project requires independent research using an approved bibliography and plan of action.  In addition to written research, the student will also present the capstone project in a public forum that is agreed upon by the project advisor and the student. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: Senior status required.  Major in French or Francophone Studies required.
FRCH 397	Honors Thesis I	3 Units	Intensive study of a literary, linguistic, or cultural topic with a faculty member, leading to the writing of a research paper in French. Limited to senior majors. Permit required.
FRCH 398	Honors Thesis II	3 Units	Continuation of FRCH 397. Limited to senior majors. Permit required. Prereq: FRCH 397.
FRCH 399	Independent Study	1 - 3 Units	The course is for students who have special interests and commitments that are not addressed in regular courses, and who wish to work independently.
FRCH 408	Immigration and the Paris Experience	3 Units	Three-week immersion learning experience living and studying in Paris. The focus of the course is the culture, literature, and the arts of the African, Arab, and Asian communities of Paris. At least half of the course looks at issues surrounding immigration that affect women in particular. Students spend a minimum of fifteen hours per week visiting cultural centers and museums and interviewing authors and students about the immigrant experience. Assigned readings complement course activities. Students enrolled in FRCH 308/408 do coursework in French. WLIT 308/408, ETHS 308, and WGST 308 students have the option of completing coursework in English. Graduate students have additional course requirements. Offered as FRCH 308, WLIT 308, ETHS 308, WGST 308, FRCH 408, and WLIT 408. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Graduate standing.
FRCH 413	Medical French	3 Units	Medical French is an upper-level course with a focus on health care in France and other Francophone countries. Students gain knowledge of the health care structures of various Francophone countries, as well as the vocabulary used in professional medical communication.  Special emphasis on Doctors without Borders (Medecins sans frontieres).  There will be visits to local hospitals and health care sites.  Press articles, media reports, films, videos, and short literary texts are used as resources. Offered as FRCH 313 and FRCH 413. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Graduate Standing.
FRCH 428	Science and Technology in France	3 Units	This course is an exploration of the development of science and technology in France, from their rise in the 18th and 19th centuries to their recent renaissance, from both a scientific and a humanities perspective. A significant component will focus on the contributions of women to science in France. Site visits in France will include the Marie Curie laboratory, the Pasteur Institute, and the Museum of Natural History. Readings will come from the fields of history of science, French cultural history, and French literature. Offered as FRCH 328, FRCH 428, WGST 333, WLIT 353 and WLIT 453. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
FRCH 437	Women in the Arab World	3 Units	The purpose of this course is twofold: It is a course that allows students an in-depth look at the diverse women who represent a number of cultures in the Arab world in nations from the Mashrek to the Maghreb. The second primary goal of the course is to study such women through the eyes of leading Arab women theorists who have made an impact not only in their own countries, but also on disciplines intersecting with women's studies worldwide. We will study the Arab woman's place in her respective society, in political and economic systems, in education, and in the family. We will also analyze her contributions to art and literature as well as to the sciences. The course will provide an overview of the Arab woman throughout history, from her origins to her place within recent movements within the Arab Spring and other current world events. As Arab women are Muslim, Christian, and Jewish, views of women within these major world religions will also be taken into account as we study the Arab woman as well as religion's impact on culture in the Middle East and in the Maghreb in particular. In the course, we will utilize theoretical texts, but also case studies as well as examples from media and the arts. During the semester, we will take advantage of teleconferencing opportunities between CWRU and two major academic units for Women's Studies in the Arab world: The Institute for Women's Studies in the Arab World (IWSAW) in Beirut, Lebanon, and the University of Jordan's Center for Women's Studies in Amman. Offered as FRCH 337, FRCH 437, ARAB 337, ETHS 337 and WGST 337. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
FRCH 461	Twentieth-Century French Literature	3 Units	A study of representative novelists (e.g., Proust, Gide, Colette, Sartre, Beauvoir) and playwrights (e.g., Claudel, Beckett, Genet) in historical context. Authors, works, and topics may vary. Offered as FRCH 361 and FRCH 461.
FRCH 473	The Novel and the Novella	3 Units	A study of narrative fiction focused on either a particular genre (the novel, the short story) or a particular type of novel (psychological novel, realist novel, detective novel), tale (the fantastic tale, the fairytale), or novella. Offered as FRCH 373 and FRCH 473.
FRCH 474	Major Writers and Literary Movements	3 Units	In-depth study of the work of a major writer, film director, or intellectual figure; or of a significant literary, intellectual, or artistic movement. Approaches, content, and instructor will vary. Offered as FRCH 374 and FRCH 474. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Graduate standing.
FRCH 475	Francophone Literature	3 Units	An examination of Francophone literature focused on the problematics of identity within the colonial and post-colonial context. Writers and works may vary. Offered as FRCH 375 and FRCH 475. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
FRCH 476	Women Writers	3 Units	An examination of important literary texts by French and Francophone women writers. Critical essays are also studied to introduce historical and theoretical perspectives. Offered as FRCH 376 and FRCH 476. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
FRCH 477	Special Topics	3 Units	The special topics course is designed to provide a forum for specific themes or subjects not otherwise covered in the curriculum. Approaches and content will vary. Maximum 6 credits. Offered as FRCH 377 and FRCH 477. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
FRCH 601	Independent Study	1 - 18 Units	For individual students or larger groups with special interests.
FRCH 651	Thesis M.A.	6 - 9 Units	Thesis M.A. serves the graduate plan A of the Graduate Handbook.
GENE 367	Commercialization and Intellectual Property Management	3 Units	This interdisciplinary course covers a variety of topics, including principles of intellectual property and intellectual property management, business strategies and modeling relevant to the creation of start-up companies and exploitation of IP rights as they relate to biomedical-related inventions.  The goal of this course is to address issues relating to the commercialization of biomedical-related inventions by exposing law students, MBA students, and Ph.D. candidates (in genetics and proteomics) to the challenges and opportunities encountered when attempting to develop biomedical intellectual property from the point of early discovery to the clinic and market.  Specifically, this course seeks to provide students with the ability to value a given technological advance or invention holistically, focusing on issues that extend beyond scientific efficacy and include patient and practitioner value propositions, legal and intellectual property protection, business modeling, potential market impacts, market competition, and ethical, social, and healthcare practitioner acceptance.  During this course, law students, MBA students, and Ph.D. candidates in genomics and proteomics will work in teams of five (two laws students, two MBA students and one Ph.D. candidate), focusing on issues of commercialization and IP management of biomedical-related inventions.  The instructors will be drawn from the law school, business school, and technology-transfer office.  Please visit the following website for more information: fusioninnovate.com. Offered as EBME 467, ECSE 467, GENE 367, GENE 467, LAWS 5341, MGMT 467, and RGME 467.
GENE 451	A Data-Driven Introduction to Genomics and Human Health	3 Units	This course introduces the foundational concepts of genomics and genetic epidemiology through four key principles: 1) Teaching students how to query relational databases using Structure Query Language (SQL); 2) Exposing students to the most current data used in genomics and bioinformatics research, providing a quantitative understanding of biological concepts; 3) Integrating newly learned concepts with prior ones to discover new relationships among biological concepts; and 4) providing historical context to how and why data were generated and stored in the way they were, and how this gave rise to modern concepts in genomics.    Offered as PQHS 451, GENE 451, and MPHP 451.
GENE 467	Commercialization and Intellectual Property Management	3 Units	This interdisciplinary course covers a variety of topics, including principles of intellectual property and intellectual property management, business strategies and modeling relevant to the creation of start-up companies and exploitation of IP rights as they relate to biomedical-related inventions.  The goal of this course is to address issues relating to the commercialization of biomedical-related inventions by exposing law students, MBA students, and Ph.D. candidates (in genetics and proteomics) to the challenges and opportunities encountered when attempting to develop biomedical intellectual property from the point of early discovery to the clinic and market.  Specifically, this course seeks to provide students with the ability to value a given technological advance or invention holistically, focusing on issues that extend beyond scientific efficacy and include patient and practitioner value propositions, legal and intellectual property protection, business modeling, potential market impacts, market competition, and ethical, social, and healthcare practitioner acceptance.  During this course, law students, MBA students, and Ph.D. candidates in genomics and proteomics will work in teams of five (two laws students, two MBA students and one Ph.D. candidate), focusing on issues of commercialization and IP management of biomedical-related inventions.  The instructors will be drawn from the law school, business school, and technology-transfer office.  Please visit the following website for more information: fusioninnovate.com. Offered as EBME 467, ECSE 467, GENE 367, GENE 467, LAWS 5341, MGMT 467, and RGME 467.
GENE 488	Yeast Genetics and Cell Biology	3 Units	This seminar course provides an introduction to the genetics and molecular biology of the yeasts S. cerevisiae and S. pombe by a discussion of current literature focusing primarily on topics in yeast cell biology. Students are first introduced to the tools of molecular genetics and special features of yeasts that make them important model eukaryotic organisms. Some selected topics include cell polarity, cell cycle, secretory pathways, vesicular and nuclear/cytoplasmic transport, mitochondrial import and biogenesis, chromosome segregation, cytoskeleton, mating response and signal transduction.  Offered as CLBY 488, GENE 488, MBIO 488, and PATH 488.
GENE 500	Advanced Eukaryotic Genetics I	3 Units	Fundamental principles of modern genetics; transmission, recombination, structure and function of the genetic material in eukaryotes, dosage compensation, behavior and consequences of chromosomal abnormalities, mapping and isolation of mutations, gene complementation and genetic interactions. Recommended preparation:  BIOL 362.
GENE 503	Readings and Discussions in Genetics	0 - 3 Units	(Credit as arranged.)  In-depth consideration of special selected topics through critical evaluation of classic and current literature.
GENE 504	Advanced Eukaryotic Genetics II	3 Units	Fundamental principles of modern genetics: population and quantitative genetics, dissection of genome organization and function, transgenics, developmental genetics, genetic strategies for dissecting complex pathways in organisms ranging from Drosophila and C. elegans to mouse and human. Recommended preparation:  GENE 500 or permission of instructor.
GENE 505	Genetics Journal Club	1 Unit	Genetics Journal Club is a graduate level course designed to facilitate discussion of topics in Genetics. Students choose "hot" papers in Genetics and present them to their peers. Group presentations are designed to encourage audience participation. The intent of this class is to expose students to cutting edge topics in Genetics and to instill teaching and leadership skills.
GENE 511	Grant Writing and Reviewing Skills Workshop	3 Units	This is an introductory graduate course in grant writing and reviewing skills. During this course each student will write a research grant on a topic of his or her choice. Proposals may form the basis for the written component of the preliminary examination in the Genetics Department. Students will also participate in editing and reviewing the proposals of their classmates. Prereq: GENE 500 and GENE 504 or consent of instructor.
GENE 524	Advanced Medical Genetics: Molecular & Cytogenetics	2 - 3 Units	This course provides an in-depth forum for discussion of fundamental principles regarding clinical cytogenetics and molecular genetics and their relevance to medical genetics, genomics and genetic counseling. Following a historical overview, topics include a discussion of numerical and structural aberrations, sex chromosome abnormalities, issues regarding population cytogenetics, clinical relevance of such findings as marker chromosomes, mosaicism, contiguous gene deletions and uniparental disomy. The course will cover principles of molecular genetics including structure, function and regulations of genes (DNA, RNA, proteins), genetic variation, inheritance patterns and both cytogenetic and molecular laboratory techniques (fluorescence in situ hybridization, micro-array, SNP analyses, sequencing) in the clinical laboratory. Students who register for 3.00 credit hours are required to do an additional paper.
GENE 525	Advanced Medical Genetics: Clinical Genetics	2 - 3 Units	Fundamental principles regarding congenital malformations, dysmorphology and syndromes.  Discussion of a number of genetic disorders from a systems approach: CNS malformations, neurodegenerative disorders, craniofacial disorders, skeletal dysplasias, connective tissue disorders, hereditary cancer syndromes, etc.  Discussions also include diagnosis, etiology, genetics, prognosis and management.
GENE 526	Advanced Medical Genetics: Quantitative Genetics & Genomics	2 - 3 Units	The purpose of this course is twofold: first, to provide a foundation in quantitative genetics and second, to focus on genomic approaches and technologies which have greatly expanded our understanding of not only rare genetic disorders but common ones as well. We will cover concepts related to risk assessment and calculation and its application to medical genetics including principles and application of Hardy Weinberg equilibrium as well as applying Bayes' Theorem as a mechanism to refine risk assessment based on data specific to a patient. We will also focus on understanding the clinical implications of the interpretation of next generation sequencing results, identify limitations of genomic technologies, and practice curation / annotation and interpretation of genomic testing results. In addition, we will discuss resources and bioinformatics tools including national databases and clinical labs to aid in the interpretation of genomic test results including variants of uncertain significance. Students who register for 3.00 credit hours are required to do an additional paper.
GENE 527	Advanced Medical Genetics: Biochemical Genetics	2 - 3 Units	Fundamental principles of metabolic testing; amino acid disorders; organic acid disorders; carbohydrate disorders; peroxisomal disorders; mitochondrial disorders; etc.  Discussion of screening principles and newborn screening as well as approaches to diagnosis, management and therapy for metabolic diseases.
GENE 528	Principles and Practices of Genetic Counseling	3 Units	Fundamental principles needed for the practicing genetic counselor.  Topics include skills in obtaining histories (prenatal, perinatal, medical, developmental, psychosocial and family); pedigree construction and analysis, physical growth and development; the genetic evaluation; the physical examination and laboratory analyses; prenatal issues, prenatal screening and diagnosis; and teratogenicity.
GENE 529	Psychosocial Issues in Genetic Counseling	3 Units	Fundamental principles regarding the psychosocial aspects of genetic disease and birth defects, its psychological and social impact on the individual and family.  Topics include the genetic counseling interview process, issues regarding pregnancy and prenatal diagnosis, chronicity, death and loss. Cultural issues and their impact on the genetic counseling session are addressed.  Resources for families are also explored.  Basic interviewing skills are presented.  Students will have an opportunity for practice of skills through role play and actual interviewing situations.
GENE 531	Cancer Genetics	2 - 3 Units	This seminar will discuss basic concepts in cancer epidemiology, principles of cancer genetics, inherited cancer syndromes, cytogenetics of cancers, predigree analysis for familial cancer risk and approaches to the differential diagnosis of inherited and familial cancers.  Additionally, topics of risk assessment, genetic testing, screening, management and psychosocial issues in providing genetic counseling to patients with familial and inherited cancers will be discussed.
GENE 532	Clinical Practicum in Genetic Counseling	1 - 6 Units	This clinical practicum provides the student an opportunity to function as a genetic counselor by preparing for cases; obtaining appropriate histories; determining risks; performing psychosocial assessments; discussing disease characteristics, inheritance, and natural history; providing anticipatory guidance and supportive counseling; using medical and community resources; and follow-up.  Students rotate through four clinical areas and one laboratory and will register for a total of 12 hours over the course of the program. Recommended preparation:  Admission to Genetic Counseling Training Program.
GENE 534	Preparing for Genetic Counseling Practice	1 Unit	This course is designed to provide students with a practical foundation in preparing for clinical participation in various practice areas. This hands-on course will build on and mirror the didactic content learned from GENE 528: Principles of Genetic Counseling and GENE 529: Psychosocial Genetic Counseling and will serve as an applied course. Students will have the opportunity to practice empathy and listening skills, patient education, and counseling techniques through patient role plays.  In addition, students will attempt practical skills such as chart review, interpretation of screening and testing reports, pedigree risk assessments, online risk models, simulated coordination of testing, application of practice guidelines in a clinical context, completion of requisition forms, and identification of genetic testing options based on insurance considerations. This practice-based exploration of clinical genetic counseling will be a safe space to practice counseling skills and will equip students to participate in patient care on clinical rotations. Coreq: GENE 528 or GENE 529.
GENE 601	Research in Genetics	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
GENE 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.) Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
GRMN 101	Elementary German I	4 Units	Introductory course emphasizing conversational skills. Students achieve control of the sound system and basic sentence structures of spoken and written German. Students must use the course material offered by the Online Language Learning Center in addition to class meetings.
GRMN 102	Elementary German II	4 Units	Continuation of GRMN 101, emphasizing conversational skills. Prereq: GRMN 101 or equivalent.
GRMN 201	Intermediate German I	4 Units	Emphasizes both language and culture and is taught in German. Review of grammar and usage of German while studying texts and videotapes which focus on contemporary life in Germany. Prereq: GRMN 102 or equivalent.
GRMN 202	Intermediate German II	4 Units	Continuation of GRMN 201; conducted in German. Study of texts and videotapes which focus on contemporary life in Germany. Prereq: GRMN 201 or equivalent.
GRMN 303	German Culture & Civilization	3 Units	Examines aspects of contemporary Germany, including political and social systems and cultural life through seminar discussions of texts, films, and other media.  Along with oral presentations and essay tests, students must select a research topic of interest to the discipline and write an analytic essay in German on the topic. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: GRMN 202.
GRMN 310	Advanced German Reading and Composition	3 Units	This advanced-level course focuses on reading and writing on the German-speaking world for students who have already studied intermediate German.  Develops abilities to read authentic cultural texts, such as contemporary newspaper and magazine articles on current affairs; readings increase progressively in length and vary in genre. It also builds advanced writing skills through composition, such as summaries, reviews, opinion pieces, letters, short creative texts, and analytic essays. Includes instruction on use of English- and German-language research tools. Taught in German. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: GRMN 202 or equivalent.
GRMN 311	Advanced Conversation	3 Units	Students work to improve fluency in spoken German. Topics include contemporary issues; current vocabulary is stressed. Students practice using speech appropriate to various situations and participate in topical discussions. Prereq: GRMN 202 or equivalent.
GRMN 312	German Proficiency Through Drama	3 Units	Readings begin with single scenes and progress to full length radio plays and theater plays which gradually increase in linguistic difficulty and complexity of central themes.  Introduction to the elements of drama such as dialogue, character and dramatic structure, as well as the genres of tragedy, comedy, and tragicomedy.  Focus: effective communication of critical, interpretative, and analytic ideas in discussion and in writing. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: GRMN 202 or equivalent.
GRMN 313	Intro to German Literature	3 Units	Introduction to German literature and the cultural issues it addresses.  Readings include the main literary and folk genres (short texts or excerpts), gradually increasing in linguistic difficulty and complexity of central themes. They cover the major literary periods from the 18th to the 21st centuries. Focus: effective communication of critical, interpretative, and analytic ideas in discussion and in writing. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: GRMN 202 or equivalent.
GRMN 315	Business German	3 Units	This course is taught in German.  It is designed to enhance students' German listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills through a variety of activities. It also aims at developing students' cross-cultural awareness and communicative competence in the specialized field of German for Business and Economics in an increasingly global workplace.  The course will explore German demography and economic geography; the European Union, the Euro, and Germany's role in this union; German economic systems, industries, banking systems, advertising and sales, transportation and tourism; Germany's corporate culture, industrial relations, codetermination in German companies, etc. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: GRMN 202 or equivalent.
GRMN 320	Topics in Narrative	3 Units	This course examines representative prose works (tales, novellas, short novels, letters, and essays) chosen to present reactions and impressions to social and aesthetic conditions in German-speaking countries and to introduce students to different styles and varieties of German prose. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: One 300-level GRMN course.
GRMN 326	Witches, Weddings, and Wolves	3 Units	Intensive study of German Folk Tales as collected and altered by the Brothers Grimm.  The Maerchen as both children's and adult literature. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: One 300-level GRMN course.
GRMN 330	Topics in German Cinema	3 Units	This course has the following objectives: 1) View and comprehend 14 German movies; 2) discuss German language, history, and culture as well as film making as they are reflected in the German movies featured in this course; and 3) learn how to write film reviews on German movies in German and English.  It provides an overview of German Cinema from the beginning to the present. Film selection representative of major directors, major periods (such as expressionism or The New German Cinema), particular themes from different historical perspectives, and literature in film. All films are in German. The course will be mainly taught in German. It counts to SAGES Departmental Seminar Requirement. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: One 300-level GRMN course.
GRMN 340	Topics in German Drama	3 Units	Overview of German drama from the beginning to the present. Explores German plays by applying different disciplinary approaches such as historical, cultural, and literary analyses.  All plays are in German.  Taught in German. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: One 300-level GRMN course.
GRMN 350	Topics in German Lyric	3 Units	This course presents a detailed study of German lyric through the frequent writing of critical papers and literary analysis of the formal elements of poetry: rhyme schemes, diction, meter, figures of speech.  The poems selected cover a variety of styles, a range of historical periods, and a sampling of authors.  Readings and discussions in German. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: One 300-level GRMN course.
GRMN 360	Topics in Major German Authors	3 Units	Concentrates on a specific author or small group of authors within an aesthetic or historical context, for example: Goethe, Heine, Bachmann, Junges Deutschland, or die Gruppe 47. Examines the breadth of themes and styles and may include literary, philosophical, biographical, and other kinds of texts.  Readings and discussions in German. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: One 300-level GRMN course.
GRMN 365	German Literature in Translation	3 Units	Goethe defined "World Literature" (Weltliteratur) as "Intellectual Trade Relations" (geistiger Handelsverkehr). This course gives students the opportunity to study German literary works in translation and thus to trade intellectual relations with a literary culture previously unknown to them. Counts toward the German major only as a related course. No knowledge of German required. Offered as GRMN 365 and WLIT 365.
GRMN 370	Topics in Literary Periods	3 Units	Overview of German literary periods from the beginning to the present.  Explores German literary works in all three major genres from the historical, social, and literary perspectives.  All works are in German. Taught in German. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: One 300-level GRMN course.
GRMN 380	Topics in Advanced German Culture Studies	3 Units	Exploration of the culture of the arts, political culture, and the cultural self-expression of the German-speaking countries from their beginnings to the present. Focus: The cultural changes within certain historical periods.  Examination of particular aspects such as culture as mass deception in fascist Germany and the GDR, the reflection of contemporary culture in literature and cinema, problems of cultural identity and multiculturalism, and the role of postmodern culture industry and the critical discourse today. Taught in German. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: One 300-level GRMN course.
GRMN 395	Special Topics in German Literature	3 Units	An advanced seminar on German literature with a specific focus that transcends author, period or genre, probably but not limited to theme or motif, such as "Faust and Monsters." Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: One 300-level GRMN course.
GRMN 396	Senior Capstone - German	3 Units	The Senior Capstone in German in an independent study project chosen in consultation with a capstone advisor.  The capstone project should reflect both the student's interest within German and/or German studies and the courses he or she has taken to fulfill the major.  The project requires independent research using and approved bibliography and plan of action.  In addition to written research, the student will also present the capstone project in a public forum that agreed upon by the project advisor and the students. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: Senior status required. Major in German required.
GRMN 397	Honors Thesis I	3 Units	Intensive study of a literary, linguistic, or cultural topic with a faculty member, leading to the writing of a research paper in German. Limited to senior majors. Permit required. Prereq: One 300-level GRMN course.
GRMN 398	Honors Thesis II	3 Units	Continuation of GRMN 397. Limited to senior majors. Permit required. Prereq: GRMN 397.
GRMN 399	Independent Study in German	1 - 3 Units	For majors and advanced students under special circumstances. Permit required.
GERO 498	Seminar in Gerontological Studies	3 Units	Major themes in gerontology. Seminar members choose a problem area, explore the relevant literature from a multi-disciplinary perspective, and develop a research project using knowledge gained through community observation and library exploration.
RSCH 700	Advanced Dissertation Research	36 Units	In order to accurately reflect the time and effort of completing the dissertation across multiple academic terms,  36 hours of accrued advanced dissertation research will be posted to the PhD students record upon successful completion of the dissertation defense and submission of final certification paperwork.
GREK 101	Elementary Greek I	3 Units	Beginning course in Greek language, covering grammar (forms and syntax) and the reading of elementary selections from ancient sources. Makes a start toward reading Greek authors.
GREK 102	Elementary Greek II	3 Units	Beginning course in Greek language, covering grammar (forms and syntax) and the reading of elementary selections from ancient sources. Makes a start toward reading Greek authors. Prereq: GREK 101 or equivalent.
GREK 201	Greek Prose Authors	3 Units	Readings from authors such as Plato, Lysias, Xenophon, and Herodotus.  Offered as GREK 201, GREK 401, WLIT 201 and WLIT 401.
GREK 202	Introduction to Greek Poetry	3 Units	Primarily readings from Homer, Hesiod, and Theocritus. Selections from Greek lyric may be introduced at the instructor's discretion.   Offered as GREK 202, GREK 402, WLIT 202, and WLIT 402. Prereq: GREK 102 or equivalent.
GREK 305	Readings in Ancient Philosophy: Plato	3 Units	Reading and interpretation of selected dialogues by Plato or other philosophical works. Offered as GREK 305 and GREK 405. Prereq: GREK 202 or equivalent.
GREK 306	Tragedy	3 Units	Reading and interpretation of selected plays of Aeschylus, Euripides, and Sophocles.   Offered as GREK 306, GREK 406, WLIT 306, and WLIT 406. Prereq: 200-level GREK or equivalent.
GREK 307	History	3 Units	Extensive reading in Thucydides' History of the Peloponnesian War, especially Books VI and VII, the expedition against Syracuse.   Offered as GREK 307, GREK 407, WLIT 307 and WLIT 407. Prereq: GREK 202 or equivalent.
GREK 308	Comedy	3 Units	Origin, ambiance, and development of Greek Old Comedy and persisting characteristics of the genre. Translation of selected plays from Greek into English.  Offered as GREK 308, GREK 408, WLIT 318, and WLIT 418. Prereq: 200-level GREK or equivalent.
GREK 370	Greek Prose Composition	3 Units	This course introduces students to the principles and practice of composing continuous passages of Greek prose.  It is designed to review and to strengthen students' command of Attic forms while becoming more aware of the ways Greek syntax was employed to express thought.  Via practice at writing Greek prose, the ultimate goal is for the students to become more proficient and sensitive readers of ancient Greek.   Offered as GREK 370, GREK 470, WLIT 370 and WLIT 470. Prereq: 200-level GREK or equivalent.
GREK 380	Advanced Topics in Greek Literature	3 Units	Study and discussion of important authors, works, and topics not covered regularly. Content will reflect particular interests of students and faculty and timeliness of the topics.  Offered as GREK 380 and GREK 480. Prereq: 200-level GREK or equivalent.
GREK 395	Directed Readings	1 - 3 Units	Readings in Greek of authors selected to serve the individual interests and needs of undergraduate students. Each program planned and completed under the supervision of the instructor with whom the student wishes to work.  Offered as GREK 395 and GREK 495.
GREK 401	Greek Prose Authors	3 Units	Readings from authors such as Plato, Lysias, Xenophon, and Herodotus.  Offered as GREK 201, GREK 401, WLIT 201 and WLIT 401.
GREK 402	Introduction to Greek Poetry	3 Units	Primarily readings from Homer, Hesiod, and Theocritus. Selections from Greek lyric may be introduced at the instructor's discretion.   Offered as GREK 202, GREK 402, WLIT 202, and WLIT 402.
GREK 405	Readings in Ancient Philosophy: Plato	3 Units	Reading and interpretation of selected dialogues by Plato or other philosophical works. Offered as GREK 305 and GREK 405.
GREK 406	Tragedy	3 Units	Reading and interpretation of selected plays of Aeschylus, Euripides, and Sophocles.   Offered as GREK 306, GREK 406, WLIT 306, and WLIT 406.
GREK 407	History	3 Units	Extensive reading in Thucydides' History of the Peloponnesian War, especially Books VI and VII, the expedition against Syracuse.   Offered as GREK 307, GREK 407, WLIT 307 and WLIT 407.
GREK 408	Comedy	3 Units	Origin, ambiance, and development of Greek Old Comedy and persisting characteristics of the genre. Translation of selected plays from Greek into English.  Offered as GREK 308, GREK 408, WLIT 318, and WLIT 418.
GREK 470	Greek Prose Composition	3 Units	This course introduces students to the principles and practice of composing continuous passages of Greek prose.  It is designed to review and to strengthen students' command of Attic forms while becoming more aware of the ways Greek syntax was employed to express thought.  Via practice at writing Greek prose, the ultimate goal is for the students to become more proficient and sensitive readers of ancient Greek.   Offered as GREK 370, GREK 470, WLIT 370 and WLIT 470.
GREK 480	Advanced Topics in Greek Literature	3 Units	Study and discussion of important authors, works, and topics not covered regularly. Content will reflect particular interests of students and faculty and timeliness of the topics.  Offered as GREK 380 and GREK 480.
GREK 495	Directed Readings	1 - 3 Units	Readings in Greek of authors selected to serve the individual interests and needs of undergraduate students. Each program planned and completed under the supervision of the instructor with whom the student wishes to work.  Offered as GREK 395 and GREK 495.
HEWB 121	Foundations of Life Science	4.5 Units	This course includes an introduction to basic elements of cell structure and function. This includes the characteristics and role of different types of cells, the cell cycle, mechanisms for cell damage, repair and death, cell signaling, differentiation and gene expression. This course serves as a foundation for the modules in Health and Wellbeing and Disease Processes.
HEWB 123	Facial Growth	1.5 Unit	Introduction to the normal growth and development of the human face from embryology to adult.
HEWB 124	Masticatory Dynamics	2 Units	The didactic portion of the course describes the function of the masticatory structures with an emphasis on the path of teeth and temporomandibular joint structures during function.
HEWB 126	Masticatory Dynamics Lab	1.5 Unit	In the laboratory, students will continue developing the psychomotor skills necessary to reproduce the functional morphology of permanent teeth, and perform basic laboratory procedures.
HEWB 128	Body as Host	4 Units	This educational module focuses on the role of immune function in preserving and maintaining health; the role of bacteria, viruses, and fungi in health and infectious disease; and the host changes that occur during oral and systemic disease processes.
HEWB 130	Oral Histology	1.5 Unit	This course provides students with a basic understanding of the biological and histological processes involved in the development of the human oral region, particularly the calcified tissues.
HEWB 134	Head and Neck Structure and Function	4.5 Units	Head and neck anatomy is one of the core courses of dental education. It provides the foundation for dental education and the practice of dentistry. This course uses a mix of lecture, prosection laboratory and problem-based learning to provide the student with the anatomical content necessary for them to carry into their practices.
HEWB 200	Directed Studies	1 - 6 Units	Directed study under faculty supervision and with special permission of the Associate Dean for Education.
HEWB 349	Dentofacial Morphology	1 Unit	This course provides the dental student with an introduction to the assessment of dynamic faces and the relatively static dentition. The course details the etiologies and characteristics of various malocclusions including developmental disharmonies observed during the growth and development of a child. Primary emphasis is laid on empowering the student in the diagnoses of malocclusions employing study casts, intra and extra-oral photographs and, CBCTs or cephalograms and panoramic radiographs.
HWDP 131	Heart and Lungs in Health and Disease	4.5 Units	Dentists need to have a general understanding of their patients overall systemic health. Health issues involving the cardiovascular organs and the respiratory organs affect many of the patients they see, and can effect treatment and treatment outcomes. A comprehensive understanding of the anatomy (developmental, histologic and gross anatomical), physiology and pathology of the Thorax & Cardiorespiratory System is essential for this purpose.
HWDP 142	Gastrointestinal System in Health and Disease	2 Units	The practice of dentistry focuses on the mouth, the beginning of the gastrointestinal tract. Therefore, an understanding of processes like swallowing and salivation are central to the practice of dentistry, while a basic understanding of digestive function is central to the continued well-being of the patient because it is the portal for entry of nutrients to the body. Disorders associated with the digestive tract, or which impact the function of the digestive tract (for instance, bulimia) can have profound effects on oral health, while some pharmacological agents used in the treatment of those disorders have potential adverse effects on oral health. Therefore, a firm understanding of the gastrointestinal tract in health and disease is a necessity for modern dental care.
HWDP 232	Renal and Hematologic Systems in Health and Disease	2 Units	One of the major connective tissues of the human body is blood. The kidneys play a role in the filtration of the plasma and assist in the maintenance of blood pressure and acid-base balance. The cellular entities of the blood (red cells, white cells and platelets) are needed to provide flow of oxygen and other metabolic substrates to and from all the tissues of the body and play a significant role in the defense of the body and repair of these tissues. It is therefore necessary for the dental practitioner to understand the histology, anatomy, physiology and pathologic processes that affect these systems.
HWDP 243	Endocrine and Reproductive Systems in Health and Disease	1.5 Unit	Dentists need to have a general understanding of their patients overall systemic health. Health issues involving the endocrine and reproductive tracts can affect treatment and treatment outcomes. A comprehensive understanding of the anatomy (developmental, histologic and gross anatomical) physiology and pathology of these systems is essential for this purpose.
HWDP 245	Musculoskeletal System in Health and Disease	1.5 Unit	The musculoskeletal system is an intrinsic part of the practice of dentistry, where an understanding of how muscles work and the normal physiology of bone serve as a background to the understanding of mastication and occlusion. A variety of musculoskeletal disorders also impact directly or indirectly on the ability of the dentist to care for their patient, while some pharmacological agents used in the treatment of those disorders have potential adverse effects on oral health. Therefore, a firm understanding of the musculoskeletal system in health and disease is a necessity for a well-trained clinician.
HWDP 246	Neuroscience in Health and Disease	2 Units	Dentists need to have a general understanding of their patients overall systemic health. Health issues involving the nervous system can affect treatment and treatment outcomes. In addition, dentists will regularly be affecting normal neural function through the use of local anesthetics and anxiolytics. A comprehensive understanding of the anatomy (developmental, histologic and gross anatomical) physiology and pathology of these systems is essential for this purpose.
HWDP 300	Integrated National Dental Board Exam Preparation	1 Unit	This course is designed to prepare students for passage of the Integrated National Board Dental Examination. Students will complete learning modules and case studies, along with practice exam questions, in order to become more familiar with the INBDE questions format and to apply and reinforce the necessary knowledge.
DSCI 330	Cognition and Computation	3 Units	An introduction to (1) theories of the relationship between cognition and computation; (2) computational models of human cognition (e.g. models of decision-making or concept creation); and (3) computational tools for the study of human cognition. All three dimensions involve data science: theories are tested against archives of brain imaging data; models are derived from and tested against datasets of e.g., financial decisions (markets), legal rulings and findings (juries, judges, courts), legislative actions, and healthcare decisions; computational tools aggregate data and operate upon it analytically, for search, recognition, tagging, machine learning, statistical description, and hypothesis testing. Offered as COGS 330, COGS 430, DSCI 330 and DSCI 430.
DSCI 332	Spatial Statistics for Near Surface, Surface, and Subsurface Modeling	3 Units	This course is on spatial modeling of near surface, surface, and subsurface data, also known as geostatistical modeling. Spatial modeling has its origins in predictive modeling of minerals in subsurface formations, from which many examples are used in this class.  Students will learn the basics of spatial models in order to understand how they are built from various data types and how their uncertainties are assessed and risk reduced.  Students will be expected to learn the rudimentary navigation of R Studio, execute pre-written publically available R code (provided), and make simple modifications.  Graduate students will be expected to learn the above and develop a 10 week modeling project focused on the use of spatial modeling methods with R using data relevant to their specific discipline or interest.  These projects will include preparing datasets to be executed in R code scripts.  Resulting scripts will be placed in a git repository for use by other students as open source resources along with documentation demonstrating the reproducible spatial modeling science and analyses for these problems.   Geostatistical (spatial) mapping is applicable across many disciplines.  Examples of graduate projects from previous classes include subsurface modeling (geology), earthquake mapping (geophysics/civil engineering), soil stability modeling (civil engineering), aquifer characterization (hydrology), and pollution/contaminant mapping (environmental studies/medicine). Offered as DSCI 332 and DSCI 432.
DSCI 351	Exploratory Data Science	3 Units	In this course, we will learn data science and analysis approaches to identify statistically significance relationships and better model and predict the behavior of these systems. We will assemble and explore real-world datasets, perform clustering and pair plot analyses to investigate correlations, and logistic regression will be employed to develop associated predictive models. Results will be interpreted, visualized and discussed. We will introduce basic elements of statistical analysis using R Project open source software for exploratory data analysis and model development. R is an open-source software project with broad abilities to access machine-readable open-data resources, data cleaning and munging functions, and a rich selection of statistical packages, used for data analytics, model development and prediction. This will include an introduction to R data types, reading and writing data, looping, plotting and regular expressions, so that one can start performing variable transformations for linear fitting and developing structural equation models, while exploring for statistically significant relationships. The M section of DSCI 351 is for students focusing on Materials Data Science. Offered as DSCI 351, DSCI 351M and DSCI 451. Prereq: (ENGR 131 or CSDS 132 or ECSE 132 or DSCI 134) and (STAT 312R or STAT 201R or SYBB 310 or PQHS 431).
DSCI 351M	Exploratory Data Science	3 Units	In this course, we will learn data science and analysis approaches to identify statistically significance relationships and better model and predict the behavior of these systems. We will assemble and explore real-world datasets, perform clustering and pair plot analyses to investigate correlations, and logistic regression will be employed to develop associated predictive models. Results will be interpreted, visualized and discussed. We will introduce basic elements of statistical analysis using R Project open source software for exploratory data analysis and model development. R is an open-source software project with broad abilities to access machine-readable open-data resources, data cleaning and munging functions, and a rich selection of statistical packages, used for data analytics, model development and prediction. This will include an introduction to R data types, reading and writing data, looping, plotting and regular expressions, so that one can start performing variable transformations for linear fitting and developing structural equation models, while exploring for statistically significant relationships. The M section of DSCI 351 is for students focusing on Materials Data Science. Offered as DSCI 351, DSCI 351M and DSCI 451. Prereq: (ENGR 131 or CSDS 132 or ECSE 132 or DSCI 134) and (STAT 312R or STAT 201R or SYBB 310 or PQHS 431).
DSCI 352	Applied Data Science Research	3 Units	This is a project based data science research class, in which project teams identify a research project under the guidance of a domain expert professor. The research is structured as a data analysis project including the 6 steps of developing a reproducible data science project, including 1: Define the ADS question, 2: Identify, locate, and/or generate the data 3: Exploratory data analysis 4: Statistical modeling and prediction 5: Synthesizing the results in the domain context 6: Creation of reproducible research, Including code, datasets, documentation and reports.  During the course special topic lectures will include Ethics, Privacy, Openness, Security, Ethics. Value.  The M section of DSCI 352 is for students focusing on Materials Data Science. Offered as DSCI 352, DSCI 352M and DSCI 452. Prereq: (CSDS 133 or DSCI 134 or ENGR 131 or CSDS 132 or ECSE 132) and (STAT 312R or STAT 201R or SYBB 310 or PQHS 431 or OPRE 207) and (DSCI 351 or (SYBB 311A and SYBB 311B and SYBB 311C and SYBB 311D) or SYBB 321 or MKMR 201).
DSCI 352M	Applied Data Science Research	3 Units	This is a project based data science research class, in which project teams identify a research project under the guidance of a domain expert professor. The research is structured as a data analysis project including the 6 steps of developing a reproducible data science project, including 1: Define the ADS question, 2: Identify, locate, and/or generate the data 3: Exploratory data analysis 4: Statistical modeling and prediction 5: Synthesizing the results in the domain context 6: Creation of reproducible research, Including code, datasets, documentation and reports.  During the course special topic lectures will include Ethics, Privacy, Openness, Security, Ethics. Value.  The M section of DSCI 352 is for students focusing on Materials Data Science. Offered as DSCI 352, DSCI 352M and DSCI 452. Prereq: (CSDS 133 or DSCI 134 or ENGR 131 or CSDS 132 or ECSE 132) and (STAT 312R or STAT 201R or SYBB 310 or PQHS 431 or OPRE 207) and (DSCI 351 or (SYBB 311A and SYBB 311B and SYBB 311C and SYBB 311D) or SYBB 321 or MKMR 201).
DSCI 353	Data Science: Statistical Learning, Modeling and Prediction	3 Units	In this course, we will use an open data science tool chain to develop reproducible data analyses useful for inference, modeling and prediction of the behavior of complex systems. In addition to the standard data cleaning, assembly and exploratory data analysis steps essential to all data analyses, we will identify statistically significant relationships from datasets derived from population samples, and infer the reliability of these findings. We will use regression methods to model a number of both real-world and lab-based systems producing predictive models applicable in comparable populations. We will assemble and explore real-world datasets, use pair-wise plots to explore correlations, perform clustering, self-similarity, and logistic regression develop both fixed-effect and mixed-effect predictive models. We will introduce machine-learning approaches for classification and tree-based methods. Results will be interpreted, visualized and discussed. We will introduce the basic elements of data science and analytics using R Project open source software. R is an open-source software project with broad abilities to access machine-readable open-data resources, data cleaning and assembly functions, and a rich selection of statistical packages, used for data analytics, model development, prediction, inference and clustering. With this background, it becomes possible to start performing variable transformations for linear regression fitting and developing structural equation models, fixed-effects and mixed-effects models along with other statistical learning techniques, while exploring for statistically significant relationships. The class will be structured to have a balance of theory and practice. We'll split class into Foundation and Practicum a) Foundation: lectures, presentations, discussion b) Practicum: coding, demonstrations and hands-on data science work. The M section of DSCI 353 is for students focusing on Materials Data Science. Offered as DSCI 353, DSCI 353M and DSCI 453.
DSCI 353M	Data Science: Statistical Learning, Modeling and Prediction	3 Units	In this course, we will use an open data science tool chain to develop reproducible data analyses useful for inference, modeling and prediction of the behavior of complex systems. In addition to the standard data cleaning, assembly and exploratory data analysis steps essential to all data analyses, we will identify statistically significant relationships from datasets derived from population samples, and infer the reliability of these findings. We will use regression methods to model a number of both real-world and lab-based systems producing predictive models applicable in comparable populations. We will assemble and explore real-world datasets, use pair-wise plots to explore correlations, perform clustering, self-similarity, and logistic regression develop both fixed-effect and mixed-effect predictive models. We will introduce machine-learning approaches for classification and tree-based methods. Results will be interpreted, visualized and discussed. We will introduce the basic elements of data science and analytics using R Project open source software. R is an open-source software project with broad abilities to access machine-readable open-data resources, data cleaning and assembly functions, and a rich selection of statistical packages, used for data analytics, model development, prediction, inference and clustering. With this background, it becomes possible to start performing variable transformations for linear regression fitting and developing structural equation models, fixed-effects and mixed-effects models along with other statistical learning techniques, while exploring for statistically significant relationships. The class will be structured to have a balance of theory and practice. We'll split class into Foundation and Practicum a) Foundation: lectures, presentations, discussion b) Practicum: coding, demonstrations and hands-on data science work. The M section of DSCI 353 is for students focusing on Materials Data Science. Offered as DSCI 353, DSCI 353M and DSCI 453.
DSCI 354	Data Visualization and Analytics	3 Units	Data Visualization and Analytics students will learn data visualization and analytics techniques focused on different types of data such as time-series, spectral, or image data science problems. This class will focus on increasing analysis of complex data sets through visualization by enhancing exploratory data analysis and data cleaning. This class will focus on creating effective data visualizations to communicate data analytics results to different audiences. Different datasets will be provided to develop different types of visualizations and analytics. Types of data visualizations include in interactive plots (e.g., bar graphs change over time), applications that allow users to adjust the visualizations based on their decisions (e.g., shiny applications), interactive maps, 3-D plots of data, etc. Discussing how an audience understands information and brings in data as well as the ethics of making data visualizations will be discussed. The class will also include ways to increase modeling and analysis with effective visualizations for credible, data-driven decision making. This will include a git repository for other students to use these codes as open source resources and the preparation of reproducible data science analyses for different types of problems. Offered as DSCI 354, DSCI 354M, and DSCI 454. Prereq: (DSCI 351 or DSCI 351M) and (DSCI 353 or DSCI 353M).
DSCI 354M	Data Visualization and Analytics	3 Units	Data Visualization and Analytics students will learn data visualization and analytics techniques focused on different types of data such as time-series, spectral, or image data science problems. This class will focus on increasing analysis of complex data sets through visualization by enhancing exploratory data analysis and data cleaning. This class will focus on creating effective data visualizations to communicate data analytics results to different audiences. Different datasets will be provided to develop different types of visualizations and analytics. Types of data visualizations include in interactive plots (e.g., bar graphs change over time), applications that allow users to adjust the visualizations based on their decisions (e.g., shiny applications), interactive maps, 3-D plots of data, etc. Discussing how an audience understands information and brings in data as well as the ethics of making data visualizations will be discussed. The class will also include ways to increase modeling and analysis with effective visualizations for credible, data-driven decision making. This will include a git repository for other students to use these codes as open source resources and the preparation of reproducible data science analyses for different types of problems. Offered as DSCI 354, DSCI 354M, and DSCI 454. Prereq: (DSCI 351 or DSCI 351M) and (DSCI 353 or DSCI 353M).
DSCI 430	Cognition and Computation	3 Units	An introduction to (1) theories of the relationship between cognition and computation; (2) computational models of human cognition (e.g. models of decision-making or concept creation); and (3) computational tools for the study of human cognition. All three dimensions involve data science: theories are tested against archives of brain imaging data; models are derived from and tested against datasets of e.g., financial decisions (markets), legal rulings and findings (juries, judges, courts), legislative actions, and healthcare decisions; computational tools aggregate data and operate upon it analytically, for search, recognition, tagging, machine learning, statistical description, and hypothesis testing. Offered as COGS 330, COGS 430, DSCI 330 and DSCI 430.
DSCI 432	Spatial Statistics for Near Surface, Surface, and Subsurface Modeling	3 Units	This course is on spatial modeling of near surface, surface, and subsurface data, also known as geostatistical modeling. Spatial modeling has its origins in predictive modeling of minerals in subsurface formations, from which many examples are used in this class.  Students will learn the basics of spatial models in order to understand how they are built from various data types and how their uncertainties are assessed and risk reduced.  Students will be expected to learn the rudimentary navigation of R Studio, execute pre-written publically available R code (provided), and make simple modifications.  Graduate students will be expected to learn the above and develop a 10 week modeling project focused on the use of spatial modeling methods with R using data relevant to their specific discipline or interest.  These projects will include preparing datasets to be executed in R code scripts.  Resulting scripts will be placed in a git repository for use by other students as open source resources along with documentation demonstrating the reproducible spatial modeling science and analyses for these problems.   Geostatistical (spatial) mapping is applicable across many disciplines.  Examples of graduate projects from previous classes include subsurface modeling (geology), earthquake mapping (geophysics/civil engineering), soil stability modeling (civil engineering), aquifer characterization (hydrology), and pollution/contaminant mapping (environmental studies/medicine). Offered as DSCI 332 and DSCI 432.
DSCI 451	Exploratory Data Science	3 Units	In this course, we will learn data science and analysis approaches to identify statistically significance relationships and better model and predict the behavior of these systems. We will assemble and explore real-world datasets, perform clustering and pair plot analyses to investigate correlations, and logistic regression will be employed to develop associated predictive models. Results will be interpreted, visualized and discussed. We will introduce basic elements of statistical analysis using R Project open source software for exploratory data analysis and model development. R is an open-source software project with broad abilities to access machine-readable open-data resources, data cleaning and munging functions, and a rich selection of statistical packages, used for data analytics, model development and prediction. This will include an introduction to R data types, reading and writing data, looping, plotting and regular expressions, so that one can start performing variable transformations for linear fitting and developing structural equation models, while exploring for statistically significant relationships. The M section of DSCI 351 is for students focusing on Materials Data Science. Offered as DSCI 351, DSCI 351M and DSCI 451.
DSCI 452	Applied Data Science Research	3 Units	This is a project based data science research class, in which project teams identify a research project under the guidance of a domain expert professor. The research is structured as a data analysis project including the 6 steps of developing a reproducible data science project, including 1: Define the ADS question, 2: Identify, locate, and/or generate the data 3: Exploratory data analysis 4: Statistical modeling and prediction 5: Synthesizing the results in the domain context 6: Creation of reproducible research, Including code, datasets, documentation and reports.  During the course special topic lectures will include Ethics, Privacy, Openness, Security, Ethics. Value.  The M section of DSCI 352 is for students focusing on Materials Data Science. Offered as DSCI 352, DSCI 352M and DSCI 452.
DSCI 453	Data Science: Statistical Learning, Modeling and Prediction	3 Units	In this course, we will use an open data science tool chain to develop reproducible data analyses useful for inference, modeling and prediction of the behavior of complex systems. In addition to the standard data cleaning, assembly and exploratory data analysis steps essential to all data analyses, we will identify statistically significant relationships from datasets derived from population samples, and infer the reliability of these findings. We will use regression methods to model a number of both real-world and lab-based systems producing predictive models applicable in comparable populations. We will assemble and explore real-world datasets, use pair-wise plots to explore correlations, perform clustering, self-similarity, and logistic regression develop both fixed-effect and mixed-effect predictive models. We will introduce machine-learning approaches for classification and tree-based methods. Results will be interpreted, visualized and discussed. We will introduce the basic elements of data science and analytics using R Project open source software. R is an open-source software project with broad abilities to access machine-readable open-data resources, data cleaning and assembly functions, and a rich selection of statistical packages, used for data analytics, model development, prediction, inference and clustering. With this background, it becomes possible to start performing variable transformations for linear regression fitting and developing structural equation models, fixed-effects and mixed-effects models along with other statistical learning techniques, while exploring for statistically significant relationships. The class will be structured to have a balance of theory and practice. We'll split class into Foundation and Practicum a) Foundation: lectures, presentations, discussion b) Practicum: coding, demonstrations and hands-on data science work. The M section of DSCI 353 is for students focusing on Materials Data Science. Offered as DSCI 353, DSCI 353M and DSCI 453.
DSCI 454	Data Visualization and Analytics	3 Units	Data Visualization and Analytics students will learn data visualization and analytics techniques focused on different types of data such as time-series, spectral, or image data science problems. This class will focus on increasing analysis of complex data sets through visualization by enhancing exploratory data analysis and data cleaning. This class will focus on creating effective data visualizations to communicate data analytics results to different audiences. Different datasets will be provided to develop different types of visualizations and analytics. Types of data visualizations include in interactive plots (e.g., bar graphs change over time), applications that allow users to adjust the visualizations based on their decisions (e.g., shiny applications), interactive maps, 3-D plots of data, etc. Discussing how an audience understands information and brings in data as well as the ethics of making data visualizations will be discussed. The class will also include ways to increase modeling and analysis with effective visualizations for credible, data-driven decision making. This will include a git repository for other students to use these codes as open source resources and the preparation of reproducible data science analyses for different types of problems. Offered as DSCI 354, DSCI 354M, and DSCI 454. Prereq: DSCI 451 and DSCI 453.
HSMC 404	Managing People and Organizations	3 Units	Examines the behavioral sciences relevant to the effective management of people and the effective design of human resources system, structure and policies. Topics include leadership, change management, motivation and pay systems, team dynamics, staffing, decision making, organizational communications, employee participation, performance appraisal, conflict management, negotiation, work design, organizational design, and organizations culture. A variety of methods, including experiential and interactive learning methods, are used to study these topics. Prereq: Master of Healthcare Management students only.
HSMC 407	Managerial Marketing	3 Units	Through lecture, discussion, cases, projects and/or simulations you will learn theory and practice of how firms develop processes to understand, create and deliver "triple bottom line" value (i.e., economic, social and environmental) to business and/or consumer markets. Specifically in this course, we take the perspective that marketing is a process of creating value for firms, customers, and other stakeholders through mutually desirable exchanges. This is the foundation of a customer orientation and a central theme of market-driven management. Methods for strategic marketing planning, understanding buyer behavior, market analysis, segmentation and devising integrated marketing programs are introduced. Prereq: Master of Healthcare Management students only.
HSMC 411	Identifying Design Opportunities	3 Units	Designing is giving form to an idea for a more desirable product, service, process or organization, and refining the idea into something that can be delivered reliably and efficiently. Good design integrates these evolving ideas with the day-to-day realities of a firms' operations, systems, marketing, economics, finance and human resources. Designing is thus a unique managerial activity that brings together changing technologies, capabilities, relationships, activities and materials to shape an organization's plans and strategies. It combines analysis and synthesis to create opportunities for improvement and means of attaining them. Viewed this way, designing is a core competence of a successful entrepreneur or innovative leader. Design analysis is the systematic review of the four orders of design found in every firm--namely, the firm's communications, products, interactions and environments--and the creation of opportunities to increase firm value by improving each. Students will identify ill-defined, ill-structured problems within organizations. Such problems are ones for which there are no definitive formulations and for which the formulation chosen affects the solutions available. For such problems, there is no explicit way of knowing when you have reached a solution, and solutions cannot necessarily be considered correct or incorrect. But finding innovative solutions to such problems can provide unique opportunities to create exceptional value. A major outcome of the semester's inquiry is a presentation of the design problem and proposed design solution. Prereq: Master of Healthcare Management students only.
HSMC 412	Lean Services Operations	3 Units	The course will be delivered over four modules: 1) Service Process Blueprints, 2) Managing Capacity in Service Systems, 3) Mapping the Value Stream (current and future state), and 4) Inventory Management in Service Systems. The topics considered are viewed in the context of healthcare management, financial services, insurance firms, call centers, back-office operations, and other applications.   Through these topics, the participants will be trained in tools that help them understand customers' expectations and needs and to identify service system characteristics that can meet these needs. We will learn how to identify errors in service and troubleshoot these problems by identifying the root causes of errors. Subsequently, we will discuss how one can modify the product or service design so as to prevent defects from occurring. Finally, we will establish performance metrics that help evaluate the effectiveness of the Lean system in place. These efforts will result to improved quality.   This course is not oriented toward specialists in service management. Its goal is to introduce you to the environments and help you appreciate the problems that operations managers are confronted with. Then, we will typically discuss some system specifics and emphasize the principles and issues that play key role in their management.  Offered as HSMC 412 and OPMT 412. Prereq: Master of Healthcare Management students only.
HSMC 420	Health Finance	3 Units	Exploration of economic, medical, financial and payment factors in the U.S. healthcare system sets the framework for the study of decisions by providers, insurers, and purchasers in this course.  The mix of students from various programs and professions allows wide discussion from multiple viewpoints. Offered as BAFI 420 and HSMC 420. Prereq: (MBAP 402 or MBAC 502 or ACCT 401H) and Master of Healthcare Management students only.
HSMC 421	Health Economics and Strategy	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to develop the analytical skills necessary for understanding how the U.S. health care sector operates, how it has evolved, the forces at work behind perceived deficiencies (in quality and cost control), and the impact of alternative policy proposals. Special attention is giving to recent developments in the healthcare marketplace, and the strategic considerations they create for providers and insurers. These issues are addressed through the lens of microeconomic theory. Under this framework, outcomes result from the interaction of decisions made by participants in the healthcare economy (e.g. patients, providers, insurers, government), with those decisions governed by the preferences, incentives and resource constraints facing each decision-maker. Principles of microeconomics will be reviewed as necessary to ensure consistent understanding of basic concepts. The course is designed to appeal to a broad audience, particularly students interested in healthcare management, public health, medical innovation, health law, and public policymaking. Offered as HSMC 421 and MPHP 421.
HSMC 425	Dialogues in Health Care Management	3 Units	Dialogues in Healthcare Management is designed to serve students in the MSM-Healthcare management program.  The course seeks to educate students of the intricacies related to specific management challenges that arise in the context of healthcare delivery.  This is accomplished through a process of facilitated dialogs with experienced healthcare management professionals.  Drawing on the experiences and deep contextual knowledge of these professionals, the course provides students an opportunity to synthesize and apply their prior coursework to better understand the challenges and opportunities that managers face to improve organizational performance. Prereq: Master of Healthcare Management students only.
HSMC 432	Health Care Information Systems	3 Units	This course covers concepts, techniques and technologies for providing information systems to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of health care organizations. Offered as HSMC 432 and MPHP 532.
HSMC 446	Models of Health Care Systems	1.5 Unit	This course is for professionals who will pursue their careers in, or associated with, the health care industry; and therefore, need to understand the structure, operations and decision influences in the health care delivery system. The course is intended to develop competence and confidence in the participant's ability to understand and operate in the industry. the largest and, perhaps, the most complex in the United States. It is applicable to the private and public, profit and not-for-profit sectors. In this course students are introduced to: the different systems of care delivery; their organization and operations; their markets and the nature of the demand for their services; and the dynamics of their interoperation among themselves and with other entities in the industry (e.g., payors/insurers, regulators and accreditors, technology and pharmaceuticals suppliers). Offered as HSMC 446 and IIME 446.
HSMC 447	Regulatory Affairs for the Biosciences	1.5 Unit	This mini-course introduces students to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the laws and regulations it enforces. A scientific regulatory agency with far reaching enforcement authority, FDA is the most powerful consumer protection agency in the world. This course will familiarize students with FDA's mission, philosophy and organizational structure, as well as policy and procedure it uses to ensure the safety and effectiveness of the food, drugs, biologics, cosmetics, medical devices and radiation-emitting products it regulates. Recommended preparation: Enrollment in the MEM Biomedical Entrepreneurship Track. Offered as BIOS 447, HSMC 447, and IIME 447.
HSMC 456	Health Policy and Management Decisions	3 Units	This seminar course combines broad health care policy issue analysis with study of the implications for specific management decisions in organizations. This course is intended as an applied, practical course where the policy context is made relevant to the individual manager. Offered as HSMC 456 and MPHP 456.
HSMC 457	Health Decision Making & Analytics	3 Units	The goals of this course are to: (1) introduce the sources of data healthcare that managers can exploit to improve decision-making in their organizations; (2) examine health decision making styles, approaches and impediments; (3) provide a framework for medical informatics and how information technology can be exploited to pursue organizational goals;; and (4) examine the analytic tools necessary for turning "raw data" into actionable information.  The course is pragmatic, covering such issues as the current state and emerging trends in medical informatics (MI), information principles, decision models and analytics approaches, as well as the impact of emerging health legislation, information systems and processes on decisions and analytics.
HSMC 501	Special Problems and Topics	1 - 18 Units	This course is offered, with permission, to students undertaking reading in a field of special interest.
HBRW 101	Elementary Modern Hebrew I	4 Units	The course objective is to enable students to develop basic communicative skills in standard Modern Hebrew. Students will become acquainted with the Hebrew alphabet and vowels, and with basic grammar and vocabulary.
HBRW 399	Independent Studies	1 - 3 Units	The course is for students with special interests and commitments that are not fully addressed in regular courses, and who wish to work independently. Prereq: HBRW 301 or consent of department.
HPSC 111	What is Science? Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science	3 Units	We look at historical and philosophical aspects of modern science. The objective of the course is to develop a sense of (1) what forms scientific research has taken historically, and (2) what it is about scientific research that makes it distinctive as a form of human knowledge. Offered as HPSC 111, PHIL 111 and HSTY 111.
HSTY 100	Introduction to History	1 Unit	Team-taught by the faculty of the Department of History, under the coordination of the Chair or Director of Undergraduate Studies of the Department, HSTY 100 introduces students to the various theories and methods that underlie historical scholarship, and to the value of historical analysis to disciplines, careers, and professions that American popular culture depicts, wrongly, as being distant from historical understanding.  HSTY 100 goes beyond high-school level teaching and analysis contained in Advanced Placement and International Baccalaureate courses to lead students to think about history as an analytical tool to understand every aspect of the lives that our students will lead in the 21st century.  Students who successfully complete HSTY 100 will receive recognition of one three-credit course for a 5 on an AP History exam or a 6 or 7 on an IB Higher Level History exam. Prereq: Score of 5 on AP History Exam or Score of 6 or 7 on IB Higher Level History Exam.
HSTY 102	Introduction to Byzantine History, 500-1500	3 Units	Development of the Byzantine empire from the emperor Constantine's conversion to Christianity and founding of the eastern capital at Constantinople to the fall of Constantinople to Turkish forces in 1453. Offered as CLSC 102 and HSTY 102. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 103	Introduction to Medieval History, 500-1500	3 Units	Medieval history and civilization from the fall of the Roman Empire to the age of the Renaissance. Interactions between medieval Europe and other Mediterranean and Eurasian cultures. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 104	Introduction to Early Modern European History, 1500-1800	3 Units	Europe has not always existed. To find out who created it and when, this course will ask two fundamental questions: First, how did the geographic, linguistic, religious and ethnic characteristics of European identity develop over the course of the sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth centuries? Second, how did Europeans in this period influence other parts of the world? Through close readings of memoirs, treatises and chronicles, and discussions of secondary literature, we will explore the political, social, and religious history of Europe from roughly 1500 to 1800. Topics include: exploration and conquest; Protestant and Catholic reformations; witchcraft and popular culture; science and medicine; Enlightenment and Revolution. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 107	Introduction to the Ancient Near East and Egypt	3 Units	This is an introduction to the history and culture of the Ancient Near East and Egypt, a land spanning from modern Iraq to Egypt that was home to the earliest known societies in written history. In this course we will learn about the relatively recent discoveries of these ancient civilizations, the first deciphering of their scripts, about the political, social, and cultural history of the peoples who gave rise to the Babylonian, Assyrian, and Egyptian empires (besides other Levantine and Anatolian powers and smaller nations such as Israel). Various aspects of the literary/scientific production of these societies will also be discussed, while reflecting upon their cultural legacy. Offered as ANEE 107 and HSTY 107. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 108	Introduction to Early American History	3 Units	This course offers an introduction to American history through a thematic survey of colonial British North America and the early United States, from the first permanent English settlements of the early seventeenth century to the onset of the American Civil War.  It focuses on (1) the emergence and development of contrasting social systems in the various colonies; (2) the causes and consequences of the American Revolution; and (3) the political, religious, and economic transformations of the period 1790 through 1860.  Readings include a mix of primary sources (historical documents) and secondary sources (books and articles written by modern scholars).  Students will examine a variety of historical methods and approaches but will particularly explore past social experiences and values through the personal (or autobiographical) writings of individual Americans of varying backgrounds.  Particular attention will be paid to the experiences of women and African Americans. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 109	Modern American History Since 1877	3 Units	This course provides an introductory survey of American history from the end of Reconstruction through the early 21st century, focusing on politics, foreign relations, the economy, and culture and social life. It is designed not to replicate high school American history courses, but introduce undergraduates to major themes in how academic historians approach the past, as well as instructing students on how to read, discuss, and write about primary sources. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 110	Introduction to US History for International Students	3 Units	This course offers an introduction to U.S. history for international and other students who have not studied U.S. history in secondary school.  The course will emphasize topics relevant to understanding how change over the past 250 years has shaped the diversity of the people, the development of the economy, and the government and politics, and the international position of the U.S. as they exist today.  Students will read a mix of classic short historical documents, quantitative analyses, and interpretations by historians and social scientists.   With respect to the peopling of the U.S. the course will consider the native populations of North America and the movements of people from Europe, Africa, Central America, and Asia, as well as the history of movement and interactions of people within the U.S.: the course will pay particular attention to slavery, segregation, and to changes in American households and families.  With respect to economic affairs, the course will consider the history of economic growth, the development of business firms and other key economic institutions, and the question of distribution -- of changes in wealth and poverty.  With respect to government and politics, the course will consider the implications of the U.S. Constitution (including its emphasis on the separation of powers, federalism, "republican" values, private property, and the Bill of Rights) for the powers of the federal and state governments; the course will also consider the development and current roles of political parties in the U.S.  With respect to international relations, the course will focus on the long-term expansion in U.S. engagement with the rest of the world, and on current challenges to the U.S. position.   These topics attract deep and continuous debate; the aim of the course is to introduce students to the best current knowledge, and the most influential debates, about them.
HSTY 111	What is Science? Introduction to the History and Philosophy of Science	3 Units	We look at historical and philosophical aspects of modern science. The objective of the course is to develop a sense of (1) what forms scientific research has taken historically, and (2) what it is about scientific research that makes it distinctive as a form of human knowledge. Offered as HPSC 111, PHIL 111 and HSTY 111.
HSTY 113	Introduction to Modern World History	3 Units	The history of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries in global context. Emphasis on the forces that have created or shaped the modern world: industrialization and technological change; political ideas and movements such as nationalism; European imperialism and decolonization; and the interplay of cultural values. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 117	Exploring American History Through Biography	3 Units	This discussion and lecture class uses various forms of biography to explore issues of American Identity throughout the course of American history.  The class will discuss how certain biographies have created archetypal American identities, and how issues such as race, class, gender, sexuality, religion, and historical context have shaped the writing, reading and purpose of biography. The last third of the class will consider the process of "national memory," the way the United States has decide to remember its past.  Here the "biography" is collective, and created by myriad strands of mass culture woven together to create a national mythology.  We will explore the works of those striving to pull apart these different strands, and explore what these memories tell us about established national identity. Students will explore biographical process through their assignments, and consider such questions as: How do American biographies influence our understanding of what it means to be American?  How does biographical medium affect the message?  Can we accept biography as history?  This course investigates biography as a constructed genre that comes in a variety of forms, including autobiography, biographical novels, oral histories, and film. Offered as AMST 117 and HSTY 117. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 124	Sex and the City: Gender and Urban History	3 Units	Gender is an identity and an experience written onto the spaces of the city. The urban landscape--with its streets, buildings, bridges, parks and squares--shapes and reflects gender identities and sexual relations. This course examines the relationship between gender and urban space from the 19th century to the present, giving special attention to the city of Cleveland. Using Cleveland as our case study, this course will explore some of the many ways in which cities and the inhabitants of cities have been historically sexed, gendered, and sexualized. We will explore the ways in which gender was reflected and constructed by the built environment, as well as how urban space and urban life shaped gender and sexual identities. The course is organized thematically and explores different aspects of city life such as prostitution, urban crime, labor, politics, urban renewal and decay, consumption and leisure and the ways in which sex and gender intersects with these issues. Offered as HSTY 124 and WGST 124.
HSTY 126	Fashion and Power: The Politics of Dress in American History	3 Units	Clothing is one of the most visible and accessible means through which we express our identities. Hence, it is hardly surprising that political and social tensions are embedded and embodied in dress. As an expressive medium, clothing and appearance became crucial in the construction of political identities and in serving as a means of control, oppression, as well as protest and resistance. This seminar will examine the links between clothing, sartorial practices and political significance. Special attention will be given to the role of clothes in negotiating and constructing gender, race, class, sexual, and national identities. Readings will address the question of sartorial politics from a historical perspective and will focus on American history and culture from the 18th century to the present.  Students may not earn credit for both this course and USSO 290U. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 132	Introduction to Modern East Asia	3 Units	HSTY 132 is an introduction to the histories of modern China, Japan, Korea, and Vietnam from the "dawn of the global world" in the 17th century to present. Taken together these regions make up the geographic and cultural unit commonly referred to as "East Asia." Over the course of the term, we will investigate the usefulness of this concept of "East Asia" by examining its origins as well as the sometimes convergent, sometimes divergent relations between this region and the rest of the world. We will also challenge the stereotype of a monolithic and static East Asia and see to develop a critical understanding of the internal and external forces integrating and dividing this region. We will examine how international diplomatic, commercial, military, religious, and cultural relationships shaped the individual countries as well as their relationships with each other and the world.   The course sweeps over large regions of time and space. It aims to put the contemporary discussion of globalization into historical perspective by examining the long-lasting interactions of East Asian countries with each other and the rest of the world. These connections were economic, political, cultural, and psychological. Topics include: global silver and trade flows, warfare and military technology, imperial domination and revolutionary resistance, and the role of historical memory, as in Nanking or Hiroshima. Sources include historical documents, pictures, films, and memoirs.  As we move through the course material our goal is not to gain total knowledge of modern East Asia, nor of China, Japan, Korea nor Vietnam.  Rather, by the end of the term you should be able to identify some of the main organizing themes in modern East Asian history and develop a greater understanding of the construction and nature of historical knowledge itself. Offered as HSTY 132 and ASIA 132. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 135	Introduction to Modern African History	3 Units	A general introduction to major themes in modern African history, with an emphasis on the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.  Topics include oral tradition and narrative, economic structure and dynamics, religious movements, colonialism, nationalism, and the dilemmas of independent African states. Offered as AFST 135, ETHS 253A and HSTY 135. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 136	Introduction to Latin American History	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to the historical and cultural development of Latin America, in an attempt to identify the forces, both internal and external, which shape the social, economic and political realities in present day Latin America.  Beginning with its pre-Columbian civilizations, the course moves through the conquest and colonial period of the Americas, the wars of independence and the emergence of nation-states in the nineteenth century, and the issues confronting the region throughout the turbulent twentieth century, such as migration and urbanization, popular protest and revolution, environmental degradation, great power intervention, the drug trade and corruption, and the integration of the region into the global economy. Offered as ETHS 253B and HSTY 136. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 137	Introduction to Modern South Asia	3 Units	This course will introduce students to the history of the region that today includes India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. The course will deal with the following themes: global trade between the Indian subcontinent and the West in the 17th century; the rise of the East India Company's dominance over the Indian subcontinent in the 18th century; the transformation of India into a colonial economy; social and religious reform movements of the 19th century; changing modalities of colonial rule after the transfer of governing power from the East India Company to the British Crown-in-Parliament; the emergence and trajectories of elite and popular anti-colonial nationalisms; the struggles of women, low status groups, and other minorities in the region; decolonization; and the partition of the subcontinent. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 138	Radical History in America	3 Units	This course examines the radical tradition in America from the time of the American Revolution until the present. Topics will include abolitionism, suffrage, anarchism, socialism, communism, black power, feminism, the New Left, radical environmentalism, and queer liberation. Recommended Preparation: High school American history. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 145	Utopia, Dystopia, and Scientific Modernity Sixteenth-Century to the Present	3 Units	A utopia is a dream of a better world; a dystopia is a nightmare of a worse one. Both are fantasies. Yet both respond to the very real technological, political and cultural conditions in which they are written. This multidisciplinary course uses utopian and dystopian literature from the sixteenth century to the present to investigate the rise of scientific modernity and the responses it provoked. Starting with Thomas More's Utopia, and ending with Octavia Butler's The Parable of the Sower and a contemporary film, students will read important utopian and dystopian works of fiction and connect them to themes that run through the history of science: the relationship between knowledge and power; the impact of new technologies; voyages of exploration and exploitation; industrialization and forms of production; ideas of gender, race, and class; nuclear power; genetics; and climate change. We encourage students to ask what led to these specific critiques or ideas, and why? What limits or determines the boundaries of the possible or the desirable to each author? And how might these still be relevant today? Offered as ENGL 145 and HSTY 145. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 152	Technology in America	3 Units	Origins and significance of technological developments in American history, from the first settlements to the present. Emphasis on the social, cultural, political, and economic significance of technology in American history.
HSTY 157	Women's Histories in South Asia	3 Units	This course traces the history of women in South Asia from pre-colonial times to the present. Themes explored in the course will include (but not be limited to): the historical transformations of institutions shaping women's lives such as state, family, religious and legal traditions; the impact of colonialism, nationalism, and decolonization on women, as well as the history of women's movements in various parts of South Asia. As we acquaint ourselves with the vibrant historiography on women in South Asia, we will also examine the theoretical and methodological challenges involved in writing histories using the analytical lens of gender. While a significant portion of the readings will focus on South Asia, we will occasionally bring in insights from histories of women in other parts of the world to help develop comparative perspectives and evaluate the South Asian cases and examples within the broader field of women's history. Offered as HSTY 157 and WGST 257. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 163	Introduction to Modern Britain and its Empire	3 Units	This lecture and discussion course covers the history of Britain at the height of its political and industrial power and the history of the expanding and contracting British Empire.  Britain was a nation of great technological, economic, and military power, but it also experienced extraordinary stresses.  Industrialization meant material prosperity for some, but hardship and dehumanization for others.  Many questioned how overwhelming poverty and ignorance could be allowed to stand beside such vast affluence.  And subjects of the British in India, Ireland, and elsewhere struggled for independence from an empire that claimed to bring freedom, reason, and equality.  The British learned to their cost, too, that decolonization often meant being caught in the crossfire of ethnic rivals.  This course will explore the many paradoxes of the history of the British at their most dominant. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 164	The History of London in London: Study Abroad	3 Units	Travel to London to learn the history of London. What was London like before it became the largest, most powerful city in the world? How was its growth and life affected by recurrent epidemic? What did it look like and how did it function as the world's lynchpin in the 1800s? How did it fare under general bombardment in the Second World War? How did that devastation, and Britain's decline after the war, shape the city we see today? Through instruction, reading, and exploration students will receive a broad overview of the ages-old history of London. Students will learn to think historically about London and any city: they'll learn the questions of social history, learn to think about the connections between built- and non-human environments, and get a grasp on varieties of local governance. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 194	Catapults and Cavalry: Warfare in the Ancient Mediterranean	3 Units	This course examines the development of warfare in the ancient Mediterranean, including the debated origins of war in prehistory, the rise of the great armies of Assyria and Egypt, the heyday of hoplite infantry in Greece, Alexander the Great's vast conquests, and the domination of the Mediterranean by the legions of the Roman Empire. Using written, visual, and archaeological evidence from the ancient Near East, Egypt, Greece, and Rome, we will focus on three main topics: 1) warfare and ancient Mediterranean geopolitics; 2) warfare and innovation, including developments in strategy, tactics, and technology; and 3) the perception and experience of ancient Mediterranean warfare, including social, literary, and artistic responses to violent, interstate conflict. Class sessions will consist primarily of lecture with regular discussion of assigned readings. For the final project, students may either write a traditional research paper or complete a creative project such as building a working scale model of a catapult, reconstructing a historic battle in a video game platform, or creating an educational website or short documentary. All readings are in English. Offered as ANEE 194, CLSC 194, and HSTY 194. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 201	Science in Western Thought I	3 Units	The development of Western thinking about the natural world and our relation to it, as part of culture, from pre-classical civilizations to the age of Newton.
HSTY 202	Science in Western Thought II	3 Units	The development of Western thinking about the natural world and our relation to it, as part of culture, from Newton to the modern age. HSTY 201 is not a prerequisite.
HSTY 203	Revolutions in Science	3 Units	Historical and philosophical interpretation of some epochal events in development of science. Copernican revolution, Newtonian mechanics, Einstein's relativity physics, quantum mechanics, and evolutionary theory; patterns of scientific growth; structure of scientific "revolutions;" science and "pseudo-science." First half of a year-long sequence. Offered as HSTY 203 and PHIL 203.
HSTY 204	Introduction to the Nonprofit Sector	3 Units	The United States has by far the largest and most important "nonprofit sector" in the world, a sector consisting of voluntary non-governmental organizations that provide health care, education and social services as well as arts, religious, and advocacy activities.  Using mostly primary sources, this course considers the significance of the nonprofit sector in the U.S., its advantages and disadvantages, its uses for different groups of Americans, and current trends. Students have the option of writing either a standard term paper, or a study of strategic challenges facing a contemporary nonprofit organization. Offered as HSTY 204 and HSTY 404. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
HSTY 205	Climate Change Science and Society	3 Units	This course provides a synoptic, multi-disciplinary understanding of the past, present, and future of anthropogenic climate change by integrating three distinct fields: the earth and environmental sciences, biology and ecology, and history. What is changing in the global climate? Why? How do we know? What should we expect in the future? What can be done? No single discipline can answer these questions fully, and by organizing the course around these big questions, we will demonstrate how different disciplines each contribute essential answers. Course covers diverse sources of evidence for climate change in the past and present, the core mechanisms of climate change at different timescales and their consequences, the impact of climate change on human history and history of the discovery of climate change, climate models and ecological forecasts, the modern politics and diplomacy of climate, climate communication, and multiple paths forward for the earth's physical, ecological, and social systems. Offered as BIOL 205, EEPS 205, and HSTY 205.
HSTY 206	Ancient and Medieval Spain: Prehistory to 1492	3 Units	This course focuses on the history of the Iberian peninsula from before the Roman conquest from the Iberians, Greek, and Carthaginian settlements, through Roman, Visigothic, and Muslim rule to the conquest of Ferdinand and Isabella of the last non-Christian territory on the peninsula in 1492.  The issues of conquest, frontier, cultural diversity, and change, tolerance, and intolerance will be examined.  Offered as CLSC 206 and HSTY 206. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 207	Philosophy of Science	3 Units	Conceptual, methodological, and epistemological issues about science: concept formation, explanation, prediction, confirmation, theory construction and status of unobservables; metaphysical presuppositions and implications of science; semantics of scientific language; illustrations from special sciences. Second half of a year-long sequence. Offered as HSTY 207 and PHIL 204.
HSTY 208	Social History of Crime	3 Units	This course explores the relationship between law and history in American society.  It uses social history methodology to suggest new ways of understanding how the law works as a system of power to advance certain interests at the expense of less powerful groups.  Emphasis is on issues of pressing concern to America's poor and working class, including the death penalty, abortion, rape, the war on drugs, and the prison industry.
HSTY 209	The Copernican Revolution	3 Units	This course will introduce students across the disciplines to the story of the Copernican Revolution, beginning with pre-Copernican astronomy and then moving from Copernicus' first writings to Newton's Principia of 1687, which united the new heavenly laws of Kepler with the new earthly laws of Galileo.  Throughout the course, students will chart the Copernican Revolution's pathways, forms, and effects, through texts, letters, maps, images, and fiction.  Students also will consider various historical interpretations of the Copernican Revolution in order to explore different conceptions of what science is and how science works.  The course will include a number of hands-on activities and trips to help students consider the meaning and implications of the Copernican Revolution outside of our readings and classroom discussions.
HSTY 211	The Era of the American Revolution, 1763 - 1789	3 Units	This is a survey of the Revolutionary period of American history, from the end of the French and Indian War in 1763 to the ratification of the U.S. Constitution in 1789.  It begins with some background coverage of the colonial period (1607-1763), but focuses primarily on the underlying causes of the American Revolution, the chain of events leading to the Declaration of Independence, the war with England, postwar conflicts of the 1780s, the Constitutional Convention, and the ratification struggle that followed, with a look forward to the so-called Whiskey Rebellion of 1794.  Lectures, readings, and discussions explore the Revolutionary crisis as a complex, multi-racial, transatlantic struggle involving Native Americans, African Americans (enslaved and free), poor whites, wealthy Anglo-American planters and merchants, Scottish traders, and British administrators, as well as multi-racial and multi-national military forces organized on radically opposing principles.  The course also examines competing scholarly interpretations of the Revolution as a progressive or retrograde watershed in American gender relations. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 212	U.S. Politics, Culture, and Society, 1790-1860	3 Units	This is a survey of U.S. history during the years between the Revolutionary era and the Civil War, exploring the transformation of American politics, religion, and culture, as well as the emergence of distinctive regional economies and social systems in the South, the Midwest, and the Northeast.  It focuses especially on the emergence of the social institutions, patterns, and conflicts that still characterize the United States during the early twenty-first century.  Lectures, readings, and discussions will also explore race slavery in the South, abolitionism, the social and economic struggles of free African Americans in the North, the gender ideology of domesticity, the changing social and economic status of women, and the emergence of the women's rights movement. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 214	Comparative Slavery	3 Units	People around the world have been enslaving one another since the beginning of time.  From the seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries, millions of African chattel labored on southern plantations, supporting an institution whose terrible legacy remains with us today.  For hundreds of years before European slave traders began ferrying human cargo across the Atlantic, however, coercive bondage was a well-entrenched feature of Mediterranean civilizations, justified by religious and secular law alike.  This course will explore diverse types of unfree labor, from slavery in ancient Greece and Rome, serfdom in medieval Europe, captivity in North Africa and indentured servitude in colonial America.  Did earlier systems of domination around the Mediterranean prepare the way for the establishment of Atlantic slavery?  How did ideologies about religious difference, ethnicity and race help justify this ultimate form of human degradation? Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 215	Europe in the 20th Century	3 Units	The twentieth century has seen stupendous transformations in the internal structures of European politics, economics, society, and culture and in Europe's place in the world. This course traces Europe's transition from a continent of sovereign nation-states or empires ruled by monarchs with starkly hierarchical social structures, through wars, revolution, dictatorships, destruction, division, and destitution, to a conflicted present. The contradictory combination of peace, freedom, and pluralism combined with cultural critique of the very consumer society that has reduced conflict challenges students' linear notions of historical development. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 216	Vikings and Medieval Scandinavia	3 Units	A survey of the history of the Vikings and medieval Scandinavia, covering approximately the eighth to the fifteenth centuries AD.  Topics explored include: causes of the "outbreak" and cessation of Viking expeditions, the role of the Vikings as raiders and/or traders in Western Europe, the role of the Vikings in the emerging states of Russia, Iceland and medieval Scandinavian law, the historicity of the saga literature, and Viking descendents--Normans and "Rus." Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 218	Jews in Early Modern Europe	3 Units	This course surveys the history of Jews in Europe and the wider world from the Spanish expulsion through the French Revolution.  Tracking peregrinations out of the Iberian Peninsula to the British Isles, France, Holland, Italy, Germany, Poland-Lithuania, the Ottoman Empire, and the American colonies, it examines the diverse ways Jews organized their communities, interacted with their non-Jewish neighbors, and negotiated their social, economic, and legal status within different states and empires.  What role did Jews play and what symbolic place did they occupy during a period of European expansion, technological innovation, artistic experimentation, and religious and political turmoil?  What internal and external dynamics affected Jewish experiences in the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries?  Through a selection of inquisitorial transcripts, government records, memoirs, and historical literature, we will explore topics such as persecution, conversion, messianism, toleration, emancipation, and assimilation. Offered as HSTY 218, JDST 218, and ETHS 218. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 219	Berlin in the Tumultuous 20th Century	3 Units	The tumultuous but short twentieth century began and ended with a united Germany, with Berlin as its capital. But in between, Berlin, and Berliners, experienced the extremes of the economic, technological, and cultural progress that the century brought, and the devastation, violence, division, and uncertainty that it also brought. This course introduces students to the German tumult of the twentieth century. We will read about historical events and developments. We will address persistent questions, such as why and how did Hitler come to power; what was life like behind the Berlin Wall; how does one come to grips with a history like Germany's in the twentieth century; and what has life been like for ordinary Berliner/innen. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 221	Epidemics in History	3 Units	The history of epidemics and pandemics, focusing on select cases. Topics will include social origins of epidemics, the evolution of scientific responses, stigma and blame, the comparative study of political and state responses, social and cultural effects of epidemics, and the representation of infectious disease in fiction.
HSTY 222	Becoming Ken Burns: An introduction to Public History	3 Units	This course focuses on the practice of public (applied) history in the United States.  Its purpose is to familiarize students with the background (historical and contemporary) of the manners in which history is taught and used outside of the school or college classroom as well to familiarize them with potential careers in public history, including museum work; editing; documentary film production; and the growing business of "history for hire." This overview will be complemented by an examination of a number of major issues in public history including the debate as to whether it can be as authoritative and insightful as academic scholarship, and the potential influences of the marketplace and politics on the topical focus and accuracy of public history "products."  The course combines lecture and seminar-style classroom sessions with a variety of assigned readings, site visits, and an examination of public history products ranging from documentaries to monuments and recreated historical "landscapes"  in order to provide students with a theoretical and "actual" introduction to the field.  All assignments and examinations will be structured as essays based upon readings, lectures, discussion, site visits, and independent research conducted by the student.
HSTY 223	The Cold War: U.S. and the World	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to the history of the Cold War from both American and global perspectives. What explains the origins and maintenance of the conflict? Can it really be considered a "cold" war when so much actual "hot" conflict took place during its organization of the international system? Why did the U.S. go to war in Korea and Vietnam and with what results? How did the rest of the world not directly aligned with the United States or the Soviet Union experience the conflict? How were American domestic politics and social life shaped by the conflict? How did earlier sites of conflict in Europe and East Asia give way to new ones in the Middle East and Latin America? How did the conflict reshape global science, technology, and ecologies? How did the conflict reshape ideas about human rights? Why did the Cold War end when it did and what international system replaced it--or did it even end at all? Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 225	Evolution	3 Units	Multidisciplinary study of the course and processes of organic evolution provides a broad understanding of the evolution of structural and functional diversity, the relationships among organisms and their environments, and the phylogenetic relationships among major groups of organisms.  Topics include the genetic basis of micro- and macro-evolutionary change, the concept of adaptation, natural selection, population dynamics, theories of species formation, principles of phylogenetic inference, biogeography, evolutionary rates, evolutionary convergence, homology, Darwinian medicine, and conceptual and philosophic issues in evolutionary theory. Offered as ANTH 225, BIOL 225, EEPS 225, HSTY 225, and PHIL 225.
HSTY 228	Asian Americans: Histories, Cultures, Religions	3 Units	This course introduces students to Asian American Studies as an interdisciplinary academic discipline. It critically examines the global and transnational dimensions of U.S. history, the constructions of "modernity" in the U.S., and the shaping of U.S. culture and religion, race and racialization, identity constructions and contestations, law and law-making, colonialism and empire building, labor and migration, politics and public policy making, and social movements through a critical study of Asian Americans and their diverse histories, cultures, religions, identity negotiations and contestations, social movements, and political activism. Offered as ETHS 228, HSTY 228 and RLGN 228. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 229	Asian Christianity: Historical Perspectives	3 Units	The history of Christianity in Asia is as old as the history of Christianity itself. But while much has been told about Christianity as it grew from an obscure Jewish sect to mighty Western Christendom, not enough attention has been given to the Christianity which spread eastwards to Asia in the first millennium of the Christian era. This course seeks to correct the imbalance by introducing students to a historical exploration of the eastward movement of Christianity from Jerusalem to different parts of Asia. Topics include the Assyrian Church of the East in Persia, India and China, European Catholic and Protestant colonial missions in the age of European imperialism, and the Jesuit missions to Japan and China. By the end of the semester, students should have a good grasp of the historical encounter of Christianity with the political, social, cultural and religious realities of Asia. Its dialogue and confrontation with these realities and the forces that led to its growth and decline. Offered as HSTY 229 and RLGN 229. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 230	Colonial Latin America	3 Units	Colonial Latin American history is a period fraught with bloodshed, deadly disease, and the brutal enslavement of Africans and Indigenous peoples, yet was also a time of resistance, mobilization, and the flourishing of arts, culture, and unique hybrid religious practices.  This course is an invitation to focus on primary sources and wrestle with the writing of colonial history throughout the last 500 years, with all its discrepancies, biases, and unanswered questions.  We look especially at the role that women, Indigenous peoples, and Africans played in society--voices that have traditionally been silenced. How can we resurrect those voices?  We ponder the construction of colonial society and conclude with how the wars of Independence fundamentally altered society. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 231	Athens to Alexandria: The World of Ancient Greece	3 Units	This course constitutes the first half of a year-long sequence on classical civilization. It examines the enduring significance of the Greeks studied through their history, literature, art, and philosophy. Lectures and discussion. (For the second course in the sequence, see CLSC 232 and HSTY 232.) Offered as CLSC 231 and HSTY 231. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 232	Gods and Gladiators: The World of Ancient Rome	3 Units	The enduring significance of the Romans studied through their history, literature, art, and philosophy. Lectures and discussion. Offered as CLSC 232 and HSTY 232. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 235	Pirates in the Early Modern World	3 Units	From the Caribbean to Somalia, pirates have captivated the American imagination.  Beyond examining images of heroic outlaws and bloodthirsty criminals in popular culture and current affairs, this course investigates maritime predators of the early modern period (16th-18th centuries).  With a focus on the Mediterranean and the Atlantic--and forays into the Indian Ocean, the Red Sea and elsewhere--it considers the motivations and strategies of sea robbers and the responses of states.  What, it asks, can Barbary corsairs, Dutch freebooters, Spanish "sea dogs," and Catholic privateers, teach us about social rebellion, religious conflict, economic development, political authority, legal norms, naval power and imperial expansion? Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 236	World War I: Crucible of the 20th Century	3 Units	World War I changed everything about Europe and ushered in a changed century of tumult, war, and division.  The European experience of the regimentation of the economy and daily life, the impact of new technology on warfare, and the very personal suffering of separation and loss changed how those on that continent viewed their countries and their world.  The war affected everything from gender relations to class relations to religious and ethnic relations and laid the foundation for even more disruption ahead.  Its legacy reaches our day and colors our own views of what is normal and what is possible.  This course will explore those multiple and manifold legacies of this founding experience of modernity. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 237	WWII from the British Empire Perspective	3 Units	This lecture and discussion course gives students the opportunity to learn about the Second World War from the perspective of the British and their soldiery from around the globe. Many might come to the course with images of the American "Bands of Brothers" fighting across France in 1944. But that was the end of the war. In the beginning, it fell to the British leadership (famously embodied by Winston Churchill), British people, and to an extraordinary extent the Indian Army to withstand a pummeling at the hands of the Axis powers long enough for America to join the conflict. The course will examine those in Britain who might have preferred a move towards Fascism in the late 1930s. It will investigate why imperial subjects who lacked democracy in their own lands fought for the British in the name of democracy against totalitarianism. And it will scrutinize those in the Empire who instead sided with the Axis. In sum, students will have an opportunity to learn what led to those many moments of choice and chance that led to Allied victory and the defeat of Fascism. Offered as HSTY 237 and HSTY 447. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 239	Freud and the Psychoanalytic Movement	3 Units	This is a course in the social history of ideas, which will examine the roots and development of psychoanalysis, and consider several major post-Freudian innovators. It will conclude with interpretations of the social context and social effects of psychoanalysis. Offered as HSTY 239 and HSTY 439.
HSTY 240	Shopping for Change: Consumer Culture and Social Movements in America	3 Units	Consumption has been central to American political, economic, and social life. Americans have engaged in individual and collective action as consumers to fight corporate malfeasance, to influence legislators, and to assert consumers' rights. Yet being a consumer is also a political practice, and forms of consumer activism have been central to some of the most important struggles for social justice, political rights, and freedom in America. This seminar examines the connections between consumption and politics by looking at the role that consumer identities and activism played in various social movements throughout the twentieth century, from the Kosher Meat Boycott of 1902 to the present. By reading primary and secondary sources, we will examine how consumption was a means to challenge gender, race, and class barriers, to claim equality and citizenship, and to fight social injustice. However, in looking at these struggles over access, control, and rights, we will also examine how the focus on consumption was used to co-opt subversive political messages and to contain radicalism.
HSTY 241	Inventing Public Health	3 Units	The core principle of this course is that public health is a concept that was formed in different ways at different times in different places.  It had no existence as we know it before the nineteenth century, but course participants will learn how it grew out of an ancient tradition of the political elite's concern that its subjects were a threat to them and the stability of the realm.  Course participants will discover how, in the nineteenth century, it became a professional practice as we know it and realized advances in human health, longevity, and security perhaps greater than any made since.  At the same time, the course will also cover how many of the assumptions of those that inaugurated public health were completely alien to present-day practitioners--even though in many ways it is a practice that helped inaugurate the modern world so familiar to us.  Course participants will learn about the close relationship between public health agencies and agendas and various kinds of social authority: political power, moral influence, colonial power, and others.  Ultimately, the aim of the course is to show participants that even though public health seems a supremely common sense practice, it had a highly contested birth and early life that was anything but natural or pre-ordained.  That complicated birth continues to shape public health to this day. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 242	History of the Body	3 Units	The human body has always had an important role in constructing social, political and cultural relations. Although it seems as though the body is a fixed, a-historical category, in recent years, historians found it to be a valuable source to understand questions of race, gender, sexuality, class, nationalism, citizenship, as well as political and social institutions. This course will explore the body as a locus of social meaning, giving a special attention to the aesthetics of the body and notions of beauty. We will examine how different bodies--male and female, enslave and free, healthy and sick, able and disable, active and idle, natural and artificial, normal and deviant--were constructed and imagined for different purposes, and how the lived experiences of bodies as well as their symbolic meanings can shed light on social, political and historical processes. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 243	The Age of Prozac: Social and Cultural Aspects of Depression	3 Units	Although often experienced as an intensely individual, private, and painfully isolated affliction, depression has profound social and cultural dimensions.  This course will neglect neither biological (neurochemical or genetic) perspectives, nor personal or psychological aspects, but will emphasize perspectives derived from history, anthropology, and sociology.  While there may be tangential attention to bi-polar disorder ("manic depression"), the emphasis will be on unipolar depression.  The course will conclude with an in-depth exploration of the rise of pharmaceutical treatments.
HSTY 245	History of Capitalism	3 Units	This course will explore the history of capitalism, from its origins to its recent past, from different angles. Themes under discussion will include, but not be limited to, industrialization, slavery, corporate capitalism, and neoliberalism.  We will also study capitalism's impact on gender, race, environment, education, and time. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 247	American Capitalism Since 1945	3 Units	This course explores the history of capitalism since the end of World War II when the United State emerged as a superpower and capitalist system expanded across the globe. It will explore the postwar economic boom, the crisis of the 1970s, and the rise of a neoliberalism by using the historical method. It will help students understand the world in which they live which is characterized by precarious employment, homelessness, and radical extremes in income and wealth.
HSTY 248	Digital History Internship with the Encyclopedia of Cleveland History	3 Units	This directed digital history internship focuses on familiarizing students with the evolving nature of on-line, vetted historical resources, most particularly encyclopedias and other multi-authored datasets, and providing experience in expanding and maintaining a major web-based historical resource.  Students will work with the editor (the instructor for the course) and the graduate student associate editors of the on-line edition of the Encyclopedia of Cleveland History (https://case.edu/ech/) in creating new content for the on-line edition of the Encyclopedia and in modifying and enhancing its website, as well as assisting with the management of its social media components.  The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History was the first urban encyclopedia on the Web, and today its site averages over 800,000 "hits" per month.  Work on the Encyclopedia will be complemented by weekly assigned readings relating to the evolution of digitally-based historical works and more generally to the issues of professional authority and veracity that have come to complicate historical discourse on the Web.  These readings will serve as the basis for a seminar-style weekly meeting and for a topically focused research paper due at the end of the semester.  The internship itself will require students to research and write at least ten new short entries for inclusion in the Encyclopedia; to assist the staff in preparing social media announcements; and to engage as needed in modifying the website.
HSTY 250	Issues and Methods in History	3 Units	A methodological introduction to historical research. Students use a variety of approaches to interpret and study historical problems. Specific topics and instructors normally vary from year to year.
HSTY 252A	Introduction to African-American Studies	3 Units	This course is designed to introduce students to the study of Black History, cultures, economics, and politics.  Students will learn about the development of the field by exploring theoretical questions, methodological approaches, and major themes that have shaped the study of black people, primarily in the U.S. context.  This is a seminar-style, discussion-based course that emphasizes critical analysis and expository writing. Offered as ETHS 252A and HSTY 252A. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 254	The Holocaust	3 Units	This class seeks to answer fundamental questions about the Holocaust: the German-led organized mass murder of nearly six million Jews and millions of other ethnic and religious minorities.  It will investigate the origins and development of racism in modern European society, the manifestations of that racism, and responses to persecution.  An additional focus of the course will be comparisons between different groups, different countries, and different phases during the Nazi era. Offered as HSTY 254, RLGN 254, ETHS 254, and JDST 254. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 257	Immigrants in America	3 Units	Immigration to America has constantly reshaped the way the nation views itself.  This course examines the overall history of immigration to the United States, but places that movement within a global context.  It also pays particular attention to the roles that policy and technology have played in controlling or defining immigration to America. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 258	History of Southern Africa	3 Units	A survey of southern Africa from about 1600. Topics include the social structure of pre-colonial African societies, the beginnings of European settlement, the rise of Shaka, the discovery of minerals and the development of industry, Zimbabwe's guerrilla war and independence, and the rise and apparent demise of apartheid. Offered as AFST 258, ETHS 258 and HSTY 258. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 259	Introduction to Latina/o Studies	3 Units	Interdisciplinary introduction to the basis for a Latina/o ethnicity through an exploration of commonalities and differences in the peoples of Latin American and Caribbean origin within the continental United States. Topics include methodological and theoretical formulations central to the field (e.g., racial, gender, and sexual formations, modes and relations of production and class, nation and transnation), history and contemporary issues of identity, family, community, immigration, and the potential for a pan-ethnic identity. Discussions will focus on major demographic, social, economic and political trends: historical roots of Latinas/os in the U.S.; the evolution of Latina/o ethnicity and identity; immigration and the formation of Latina/o communities; schooling and language usage; tendencies and determinants of socioeconomic and labor force status; discrimination, segregation and bias in contemporary America; racial and gender relations; and political behavior among Latinas/os.   Offered as: ETHS 252B and HSTY 259. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 260	U.S. Slavery and Emancipation	3 Units	Begins with the African encounter with Europeans during the emergence of the modern slave trade. Students are introduced to the documents and secondary literature on the creation and maintenance of slavery, first in colonial America, and then in the United States. The course concludes with the destruction of slavery. Offered as AFST 260, ETHS 260 and HSTY 260. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 261	African-American History 1865-1945	3 Units	Explores the fashioning of a modern African-American culture between emancipation and the end of World War II. Emergence of a northern-based leadership, the challenge of segregation, emergence of bourgeois culture, the fashioning of racial consciousness and black nationalism, the shift from a primarily southern and rural population to one increasingly northern and urban, the creation and contours of a modern African-American culture, the construction of racial/gender and racial/class consciousness. Offered as AFST 261, ETHS 261 and HSTY 261. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 262	African-American History Since 1945	3 Units	Completes the three-term sequence of the African-American history survey (although the first two courses are not prerequisites for this course). Explores some of the key events and developments shaping African-American social, political, and cultural history since 1945. Offered as AFST 262, ETHS 262 and HSTY 262. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 270	Introduction to Gender Studies	3 Units	This course introduces women and men students to the methods and concepts of gender studies, women's studies, and feminist theory.  An interdisciplinary course, it covers approaches used in literary criticism, history, philosophy, political science, sociology, anthropology, psychology, film studies, cultural studies, art history, and religion.  It is the required introductory course for students taking the women's and gender studies major. Offered as ENGL 270, HSTY 270, PHIL 270, RLGN 270, SOCI 201, and WGST 201. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ENGL 150 or passing letter grade in a 100 level first year seminar in FSCC, FSNA, FSSO, FSSY, FSTS, or FSCS.
HSTY 272	Sports in America: From Play to Profit	3 Units	This course reviews the history of sports in America from the colonial period to the present.  It gives particular attention to the evolution of sports as a major business and to the roles of gender, ethnicity, and race in the history of America sport, as well as to the emergence of sport as a major defining characteristic of America life and society. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 273	Race and Gender in Popular Culture	3 Units	This course explores how notions of race and gender have been constructed, reflected and contested through American popular culture from the nineteenth century to the present. A special focus will be given to the reciprocal relationship between culture, politics and the economy, and the ways in which class, gendered, and racial identities reflected and shaped them. We will examine how different forms of popular culture, broadly defined as both cultural artifacts and as cultural practices provide us with new types of historical sources and how historians are using them to rethink historical questions such as labor struggles, empire, immigration, and democracy. Readings includes both primary and secondary documents and topics are organized chronology. In considering the multifaceted aspects of popular culture, we will examine how it became a useful prism to shape, express and influence notions of gender, sexuality, and race. Offered as HSTY 273 and WGST 273. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 274	Race and Medicine	3 Units	Race, racism, and medicine have long been intertwined. Medicine has had a major role in the formation of the concept of race, and racism has had important roles in the development of modern medicine, and in the production of health inequalities. This course looks at these relationships from a historical point of view. Designed to be a part of the minor in African and African-American studies, it emphasizes African and African American history, though there will be opportunities for students who wish to explore other aspects of race, ethnicity, medicine. Topics will include the medical construction of race, African medical systems, medicine and slavery, human experimentation, health and segregation, anti-racist medicine, and continuing problems of health inequality. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 276	Science in Space and Time: Where Science Happens	3 Units	This course will focus on a range of different sites where science is produced, from the printing shops of the sixteenth century to the modern scientific laboratory, from botanical gardens to the ocean, and from astronomical observatories to computer simulations. By considering scientific production across these various sites at different moments in time, we will better understand what science is, how it works, and how it has changed.  We will likewise consider not just the sites themselves but also the different geographic localities where they are found, and the ways in which geography and cultural difference affect the production of scientific knowledge.  This course will combine historical, anthropological, sociological, and philosophical perspectives as we explore these topics.
HSTY 278	Nineteenth-Century Europe	3 Units	This course examines the history of Europe during the so-called long nineteenth century, lasting from the French Revolution, which signaled the end of the Old Order, through World War I, which led to the end of the European primacy in the world.  Major themes include decline of aristocratic hegemony, the emergence of new ideologies (especially nationalism, liberalism, and socialism), the rise of the bourgeoisie, culture in Europe's golden age, and increasing national rivalry and competition. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 279	Islam in America	3 Units	The United States is home to one of the most diverse Muslim communities in the world. Using a variety of primary and secondary sources, this course examines the rich history of Islam in the United States, from the 18th century to the present, as it relates to key moments within American politics, religion and culture, and to transnational developments in Islamic thought and practice. We will also explore important issues within contemporary Muslim communities, including gender, shari'a, and religious pluralism. In addition to studying the experiences of Muslim immigrants, students will also investigate the vital role of African-American Muslims and converts in the development of American Muslim institutions, beliefs and rituals. This course will also introduce students to the history of Islam in Cleveland, and provide them with the opportunity to contribute to original research on Muslim communities in our city. Offered as AFST 219, HSTY 279, RLGN 219, and WGST 219. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 280	History of Modern Mexico	3 Units	This course explores the major issues that have influenced the formation of modern Mexico.  This class is organized around three major themes.  First, we will examine Mexican identity formation and its political implications. Second, we will assess Mexican life in relation to the development of the Mexican economy.  Finally, we will survey how elite and popular forms of violence have affected Mexican society.  Throughout the course, we will discuss the significance of the colonial heritage, regional distinctions, racial and gender stratification, and the creation and reconfiguration of various types of borders. Offered as HSTY 280 and ETHS 280. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 288	Imperial China: The Great Qing	3 Units	This course is an introduction to the history of Imperial China, from the fall of the Ming Dynasty in 1644 to the creation of the Chinese republic in 1912.  We will explore the major historical transformations (political, economic, social, and cultural) of the last imperial dynasty, the Qing (1644-1911), and develop an understanding of the major social, political, economic, and intellectual cultural forces shaping the formation of modern China.  Contrary to commonly-held ideas in both West and in China that traditional Chinese society was timeless or stagnant, historians now see dramatic and significant changes during this period--to the economy, to gender relations, to religion, and to many other aspects of life.  This course surveys the social, political, economic, and cultural history of this era, with emphasis on recent research.  The main goals of the course will be to acquaint students with the key changes and to show the interplay between economic, social, and cultural changes on the one hand and political developments on the other.  By the end of the semester you should have a good sense of how Chinese society was transformed over the course of the 17th through early 20th centuries.  The topics we will discuss include urbanization and commerce; gender, family and kinship; education and the examination system; opium and free trade; and ethnicity and nationalism. Offered as ASIA 288 and HSTY 288. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 289	Reform, Revolution, Republics: China 1895 to Present	3 Units	Completes a two-term sequence of the Chinese history survey, although HSTY 288 is not a prerequisite for this course.  Beginning with the First Sino-Japanese War (1895), we review the historical development of intellectual discourse, public reaction, and political protest in later Imperial China through the creation of the People's Republic in 1949 forward to contemporary times.  In contrast to the conventional description of China from a Western point of view, this course tries to explain the emergence of modern China in the context of its intellectual, political, and socio-economic transformation as experienced by Chinese in the late 19th and into the 20th century.  By discussing the influence of the West, domestic rebellions, and political radicalism, we examine how the Chinese state and society interacted in search for modernization and reforms, how these reforms were continued during the Republican period, and to what extent historical patterns can be identified in China's present-day development. Offered as ASIA 289 and HSTY 289. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 294	History of Nature	3 Units	What is nature, and what counts as natural? This course will examine the complicated and varied historical relationships between people and the natural world in the west. Like humans, nature, too, has a history, and its meanings, boundaries, and uses have changed dramatically over time. By studying those changes, we gain insight not merely into the world we inhabit and the ways that we have shaped it, for better or worse, but also into ourselves--our beliefs, values, and ambitions. The course will cover approaches to nature from the ancient Greeks to the modern anthropocene. We will look at how nature has been understood over time not only through texts but also through art, objects, and film.  The course will include visits to various local sites in order for us to pursue these themes in a hands-on way.
HSTY 299	Topics in History	3 Units	Subject matter will vary with instructor but will focus on some particular topic or historical approach. Course description available from departmental office.
HSTY 302	Ancient Greece: Archaic, Classical, and Hellenistic Periods	3 Units	The rise of Hellenic thought and institutions from the eighth to the third centuries B.C., the rise of the polis, the evolution of democracy at Athens, the crises of the Persian and Peloponnesian Wars, fifth-century historiography, the growth of individualism, and the revival of monarchy in the Hellenistic period. Offered as CLSC 302 and HSTY 302. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 303	History of the Early Church: First Through Fourth Centuries	3 Units	Explores the development of the diverse traditions of Christianity in the Roman Empire from the first through the fourth centuries C.E. A variety of New Testament and extra-Biblical sources are examined in translation. Emphasis is placed on the place of Christianity in the larger Roman society, and the variety of early Christian ideals of salvation, the Church, and Church leadership. Offered as HSTY 303 and RLGN 373. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 304	Ancient Rome: Republic and Empire	3 Units	Growth and development of the Roman state from the unification of Italy in the early third century B.C. to the establishment of the oriental despotism under Diocletian and Constantine. The growth of empire in the Punic Wars, the uncertain steps toward an eastern hegemony, the crisis in the Republic from the Gracchi to Caesar, the new regime of Augustus, the transformation of the leadership class in the early Empire, and the increasing dominance of the military over the civil structure. Offered as CLSC 304 and HSTY 304. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 306	History of Museums: Theory and Reality	3 Units	This course is an intensive summer internship (10 hours per week) at the Western Reserve Historical Society, complemented by extensive readings in museum/archival theory and public historical perception. It is designed both to introduce students to museum/archival work and to compare theoretical concepts with actual museum situations. Interns will be assigned a specific project within one of the Society's curatorial or administrative divisions, but will have the opportunity to work on ancillary tasks throughout the Historical Society's headquarters in University Circle. Offered as HSTY 306 and HSTY 406.
HSTY 310	The French Revolutionary Era	3 Units	Causes, progress, and results of the internal transformation of France from 1789 to 1815; impact of revolutionary ideas on other European and non-European societies.
HSTY 311	Seminar: Modern American Historiography	3 Units	This seminar examines the approaches that professional historians of the United States have taken to the writing of American history in the past fifty years, with emphasis on changes in historical concerns, master debates among historians, and contemporary interests.  Topics covered include national politics and government, economic development, social history, the history of ethnicity, race, and gender, and foreign policy and international relations.  Each student will read widely and will prepare a series of reports on selected books and authors. Offered as HSTY 311 and HSTY 411.
HSTY 313	Comparative White Supremacy	3 Units	White supremacy is a set of assumptions, ideas, and practices that pervade the globe. Far from an outgrowth of something inscrutable like "hate" or "human nature," white supremacy emerged in history amid specific circumstances. Topics will include colonialism, slave trades, the history of the nation state, scientific racism, Social Darwinism, and institutionalized racism in liberal democracies. It will be globally-comparative, focusing on former "white settler colonies." Having taken the class, seminar participants will understand whence today's manifestations of white supremacy came. Put another way, hope for dismantling white supremacy depends on understanding its historical footings. Offered as HSTY 313 and HSTY 413. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 314	Innovation and French Science	Past, Present, and Future	3 Units	The French scientific enterprise over the past 250 years has been buffeted by politics, war, civil unrest, and economic and societal changes.  This study abroad course examines the evolution of science in France in light of these influences, how women have play an outsized role relative to the U.S., and the centrality of the French to humanity's scientific endeavor over the centuries. Students will visit many important scientific venues, both historical and modern, around Paris and elsewhere in the country.  Readings from a variety of sources -- scientific, literary, historical -- and informal meetings with French scientists, engineers, and students will provide a comprehensive portrait of French science and scientific history from a variety of perspectives.  The course will be conducted in English, although there is ample opportunity to interact in French if the student desires.  The course meets the CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement and may meet breadth requirements in certain programs.  Not available for credit to students who have completed FRCH 328/428, PHYS 333, WGST 333, or WLIT 353/453. Offered as CHEM 314, HSTY 314, PHYS 314, and WGST 314. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 315	Heresy and Dissidence in the Middle Ages	3 Units	Survey of heretical individuals and groups in Western Europe from 500 - 1500 A.D., focusing on popular rather than academic heresies.  The development of intolerance in medieval society and the problems of doing history from hostile sources will also be explored. Offered as HSTY 315 and RLGN 315. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 318	History of Black Women in the U.S.	3 Units	Chronologically arranged around specific issues in black women's history organizations, participation in community and political movements, labor experiences, and expressive culture. The course will use a variety of materials, including autobiography, literature, music, and film. Offered as AFST 318, ETHS 318, HSTY 318, and WGST 318.
HSTY 319	The Crusades	3 Units	This course is a survey of the history of the idea of "crusade," the expeditions of Western Europeans to the East known as crusades, the Muslim and Eastern Christian cultures against which these movements were directed, as well as the culture of the Latin East and other consequences of these crusades. Offered as HSTY 319 and RLGN 319. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 320	Alexander the Great: Materials and Methods	3 Units	This course is the Classics Departmental Seminar in the SAGES sequence (normally taken in the Spring semester of a major's Junior year), though it can also be taken for regular credit in Classics or History by both undergraduate and graduate students. The seminar offers students a firm grounding in the disciplines of Classics and Ancient Near East and Egyptian Studies with an emphasis on the diverse materials (particularly primary source material), methods and approaches that can be brought to bear on the study of Ancient Near Eastern, Egyptian, and Greco-Roman antiquity. Students will read and discuss the ancient sources and contemporary scholarship on the enigmatic Alexander the Great drawn from various fields of Classics, the Ancient Near East and Egypt, including history, archaeology, art history, philosophy, gender studies, epigraphy, numismatics, and the reception of Alexander. Based upon this, they will then write a research paper that employs conventions found in the field of Classics and Ancient Near East and Egyptian Studies. Much of this training, however, will also be transferable to other fields and periods. Because the scope of the seminar moves (along with Alexander himself) beyond Europe and examines the historical foundations of the antagonism between East and West, this course qualifies as a Global and Cultural Diversity course. Offered as ANEE 316, CLSC 320, CLSC 420, HSTY 320 and HSTY 420. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 322	Christianity in China	3 Units	This course critically evaluates Christianity's long history in China, beginning with the "Luminous Religion" (Jingjiao) that was propagated by Assyrian Christian missionaries in Tang China (7th century CE), the missionary endeavors of Catholic and Protestant foreign missionaries and mission societies, the rise of indigenous Chinese Christianities that sought independence from foreign missionaries, the impact of communist rule and the Cultural Revolution, and current developments involving both the official government-approved churches (i.e., the Three Self Patriotic Movement and the Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association) on the one hand, and the house church movement (jiating jiaohui) on the other hand. Students will critically discuss and analyze the historical dimensions of Christianity's presence in China and engagement with various social, cultural, political, philosophical, and religious aspects of Chinese society, past and present, and consider the implications of emergent forms of contemporary indigenous Chinese Christian movements for the future of Chinese Christianity. Offered as RLGN 316, RLGN 416, HSTY 322, CHIN 316 and ETHS 326. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 323	Fascism in America	3 Units	In recent years, there is a growing public discussion about the rise of fascist trends and movements in America. This course will explore the historic roots of this discussion, focusing on the period between the late nineteenth century and McCarthyism in the early 1950s. Using both primary and secondary sources, we will examine in class the origins and manifestations of fascist ideas in the American context, looking at topics such as government repression, racism, nativism, the rise of the surveillance state, red scares, and immigration persecution. Students will engage in thinking of the long history of undemocratic forces in America and their place in American culture, as well as how their legacies shape our political landscape today. Offered as HSTY 323 and HSTY 423.
HSTY 328	Comparative Perspectives on Museum and Archive History and Practice	3 Units	Comparative Perspectives on Archives and Museum History and Practice is a distance learning based course shared with students at Bilkent University in Ankara, Turkey.  The course focuses on a comparison of the history and development of archives and museums in the United States and in late Ottoman and Republican Turkey.  Topics considered include the "ownership" of culture; state vs. private control of heritage; marketing of museums; and the impact of evolving technologies on the presentation and preservation of culture.  Students work together via a shared, live lecture format.  In addition to the instructor, museum and archive professionals from both the US and Turkey provide lectures and lead discussions during the semester.  The primary intellectual product of the course is a final paper/project which compares the history, operational structure, and mission of a museum/archive in the US with a similar institution in Turkey.  The paper/project is created by collaborative effort between a student at CWRU and one at Bilkent.  Provided grant funding is available, the course may involve exchange visits to Turkey and the US. Offered as HSTY 328 and HSTY 428. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 332	European International Relations 1789-1945	3 Units	Presents a broad interpretation of the development of the international system in Europe between the French Revolution of 1789 and the end of the European era in 1945. It explains why and how the closed European state system at the beginning of the nineteenth century evolved into an international transcontinental system by the early twentieth century. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 333	Reading Capital: Political Economy in the Age of Modern Industry	3 Units	Since its first publication in German in 1867, and its appearance in English in 1886, Karl Marx's Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume I, has occupied a seminal position in European thought.  Beginning with the presumptions of classical liberal political economy, Marx employed his technique of the materialist dialectic to unmask, in his view, the contradictions and structural limitations that the capitalist mode of production imposed upon capitalists and proletarians alike.  Much mentioned, but seldom read, Volume I of Capital remains a crucial window into understanding the intellectual, economic, social, and cultural currents of the 19th century, and its impact extends into the 21st .  This course consists of a close, directed reading of the entire text of this volume, combined with discussion, research, and coordinated exploration, so that students can bring this powerful critique to bear on their reading of history and economics in the modern era. Offered as HSTY 333 and HSTY 433. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 334	History of 19th Century Germany	3 Units	Examines the political, social, economic, and cultural history of Germany from the late eighteenth century to 1914. Explores the intellectual and social background to the rise of German liberalism and nationalism, the struggle with bureaucratic absolutism, the revolutions of 1848, industrial capitalism and the emergence of a class society, unification under Bismarck, the role of the state, culture, religion, and changes of mentality, the development of mass politics, and the coming of World War I. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 335	History of 20th Century Germany	3 Units	Examines the tumultuous history of Germany from 1914 to the unification of the two Germanys in 1989-1990. From the totalizing and traumatic experience of World War I, through a failed revolution, the republican experiment of Weimar, the National Socialist dictatorship under Hitler and the divided Germany suspended between the superpowers, to the newly unified democratic Federal Republic. Examines the ways in which Germans have tried to reconcile the state to their society, economy, and individual lives. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 337	Ancient Medicine	3 Units	This course offers a general survey of the history of medicine from its origins in pre-historical times to Galen (2nd c. CE) with a view to gaining a better understanding of the path that eventually lead to modern medical practice. The various medical systems considered, including the ancient Babylonian, Egyptian, Jewish, Chinese, Ayurvedic, Greek and Roman traditions, will be examined through the study of primary and secondary sources, while key conceptual developments and practices are identified within their cultural and social context. Special issues, such as epidemics, women's medicine, and surgery, are also explored and discussed. Offered as ANEE 337, CLSC 337, CLSC 437, HSTY 337, and HSTY 437. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 338	History of the American West	3 Units	The U.S. West has meant many things throughout American history--early explorers called it the Great American Desert, railroad boosters lured settlers to it by promising to make the arid land bloom into an agricultural Eden, urban immigrants looked to its limitless stretches of land as an escape from industrial labor, children read dime novels that glorified its heroes, and millions of tourists celebrate its raw beauty by visiting Yellowstone, Yosemite, and the Grand Canyon.  The West has also been home diverse native societies for thousands of years, Asian immigrants who viewed it as an eastern frontier, women who struggled to feed their children in an arid land, and Latin Americans, whose ancestors often preceded the entry of White Americans.  This course introduces students to the themes, questions, and debates central to the study of the American west by drawing in primary source material and scholarly interpretations.  The goal of this course is to provide students with an understanding of the human history of the American west and the ability to express that history in clear, passionate writing and in-class discussion. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 339	The Origins of the Arab-Israeli Conflict, 1900-1948	3 Units	The British Empire took control of Palestine after driving the Germans and Turks from the region near the end of World War I.  From that moment on, the British had an increasingly difficult time administering the region.  Jewish colonists had already been settling in the land for decades, and with their takeover, the British gave them and other Zionists reason to believe that the Empire would facilitate Jewish efforts.  At the same time, the indigenous Arabs of Palestine appealed to the British to protect their very birthright, to keep their country from passing into someone else's hands.  The British gave Arabs, too, reason to believe that they would recognize and defend their claims.  In the few decades that the British Mandate governed Palestine it oversaw riots, revolution, and terrorist bombings.  When it withdrew from Palestine, its legacy was a brutal war between Arabs and Jews; and the legacy of that war holds an iron grip on the course of world history to this day.  Had the British Empire not been in Palestine, and not made the fateful decisions that it did, there would be no Israel and no Arab-Israeli conflict as we know them.  Course materials include histories of Zionism, pre-Zionist Palestine, the British Mandate years, the British Empire in other Arab lands, and the 1948 war and aftermath.  Primary sources from the perspective British officials on the ground in Palestine receive much attention.  The histories of engineering and agriculture are highlighted alongside traditional social and political perspectives. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 343	Racial Capitalism	3 Units	This course examines the utility of the concept of racial capitalism. What is racial capitalism and does the term help us conceptualize how capitalism actually works or does it conflate and confuse distinct forms of oppression? Through readings that explore the relationship between capitalism and race, we will seek to better understand the origins of capitalism, the history of commodifying enslaved laborers, the making of legally free workforces, and the ideologies that rationalize the super exploitation of racialized citizens and noncitizens. Offered as HSTY 343 and HSTY 443. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 345	The Modern European City	3 Units	An examination of social, cultural, political, economic, and architectural and urban planning aspects of life in European cities in nineteenth and twentieth centuries.  The principal focus will be the transition of medieval and early modern cities to modern metropolises, both spatially and socially. Case studies may include London, Paris, Berlin, Vienna, Rome, Moscow, and cities in East-Central Europe, among others. Offered as HSTY 345 and HSTY 445. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 346	Guns, Germs, and Steel	3 Units	Jared Diamond's Guns, Germs, and Steel won the Pulitzer for non-fiction in 1998.  Diamond, a physiologist, explains that Western Europe came to occupy and dominate large areas of the globe because of natural resources present in certain regions of the Old World since the end of the last Ice Age.  Where a historian might look for answers in the written evidence left by historical individuals, Diamond examines ancient patterns of plant diffusion or the place of mountain ranges and deserts in the development of technologies.  This seminar is about applying the history of a specific time and place namely North America from European contact to 1850 - to Diamond's general environmental explanations and models.  Placing Diamond's broad explanations within specific historical contexts is revealing.  A range of alternative methods, perspectives, primary sources from North America, and case studies (especially within environmental history) help develop a critical understanding of the complexities of European expansion into the New World.  The course engages in an extended comparative exploration of the worldviews of different world cultures, most extensively comparing European worldviews with Native American, but also paying significant attention to Asian worldviews.  The Native American cultures under consideration include those of both North and South America. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 348	History of Modern Political and Social Thought	3 Units	This course explores the responses of philosophers, economic theorists, culture critics, and public policy makers to changes in western society wrought by industrialization by focusing on their concerns with technological change. Offered as HSTY 348, HSTY 448 and POSC 348.
HSTY 353	Women in American History I	3 Units	The images and realities of women's social, political, and economic lives in early America. Uses primary documents and biographers to observe individuals and groups of women in relation to legal, religious, and social restrictions. Offered as HSTY 353, WGST 353, and HSTY 453. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 354	Women in American History II	3 Units	With HSTY 353, forms a two-semester introduction to women's studies. The politics of suffrage and the modern woman's efforts to balance marriage, motherhood, and career. (HSTY 353 not a prerequisite.) Offered as HSTY 354, WGST 354, and HSTY 454. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 355	Age of American Civil War 1815-80	3 Units	This course examines the causes and consequences of the Civil War, focusing on the rise of sectionalism, the dynamics of conflict, and reconstruction.  Heavy emphasis is placed on archival research in relevant first person accounts from the period.
HSTY 356	Industrial America: 1880-1940	3 Units	This course will explore the history of the United States from 1880 to 1940 as the nation organized itself into a modern industrial society.  We will examine the rise of a corporate and technological society, the development of cities and urban problems, the growth of government, and the way in which immigrants, women, and African-Americans negotiated a shifting social organization.  This class will also focus on the growing dominance of consumerism and the cultural and intellectual critique of the changes that occurred during these events
HSTY 358	America Since 1945	3 Units	This course provides an advanced survey of American history from 1945 through the early 21st century, focusing on politics, foreign relations, the economy, culture, and social life. Particular emphasis will be given to political economy and the development of postwar consumerism; race, segregation, and Civil Rights; social movements for women's liberation, Indian rights, and gay rights; the accomplishments and failures of postwar liberalism and the rise of modern conservatism; the emergence of the Cold War at home and abroad; the collapse of the New Deal Order and the new partisan realignment; the construction of the postwar international system and its late-century fraying; globalization and its discontents; the emergence of neoliberalism and its consequences; and the collapse of the Cold War and the creation of the War on Terror.
HSTY 359	Books as Bombs: Books that Reshaped American Culture	3 Units	Every now and again a piece of prose profoundly reshapes American society and culture. In this advanced undergraduate seminar, students will read and discuss a selection of such works under the tutelage of Professors Shulman, a specialist in the History of Science and Technology, and Sentilles, who specializes in social and cultural history. The professors will set up the context of the work's publication or creation and then lead the class in a lively dissection of both the work and its impact. The main question asked of each book is "how and why did this work have such an effect?" In attempting to answer that question, students will come to a greater understanding of society that created and then responded to each work. Offered as HSTY 359 and HSTY 459. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
HSTY 363	Gender and Sexuality in America	3 Units	This multicultural seminar uses a mixture of historical text, gender theory, personal biography, and artistic expression to explore changing notions of gender and sexuality over the past two centuries in the United States. Offered as HSTY 363, HSTY 463 and WGST 363. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 371	Jews Under Islam and Christianity	3 Units	This course examines the social and political status of Jews under Muslim and Christian rule since the Middle Ages.  Themes include interfaith relations, Islamic and Christian beliefs regarding the Jews, Muslim and Christian regulation of Jewry, and the Jewish response. Offered as HSTY 371, JDST 371 and RLGN 371. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 373	Women and Medicine in the United States	3 Units	Students in this seminar will investigate the experiences of American women as practitioners and as patients.  We will meet weekly in the Dittrick Medical Museum for discussion of texts and use artifacts from the museum's collection.  After a unit exploring how the female body was viewed by medical theorists from the Galenic period to the nineteenth-century, we will look at midwives, college-trained female doctors and nurses, and health advocacy among poor populations.  We will then look at women's experiences in terms of menstruation, childbearing, and menopause, before exploring the cultural relationship between women and psychological disorders. Offered as HSTY 373, HSTY 473, and WGST 373. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 378	North American Environmental History	3 Units	This course introduces major questions and approaches in the study of environmental history.  Taking North American as our subject, we explore how humans have shaped the environment of the continent and how human history has, in turn been shaped by the natural world form antiquity to the present.  Major topics include Pleistocene extinctions, the Columbian exchange, the market revolution in agriculture, American epidemics, industrialization, the origins of conservation, the environmental movement, and the globalization of America's environmental footprint.   Offered as HSTY 378 and HSTY 468.
HSTY 387	Growing Up in America: 1607 - 2000	3 Units	Children have been growing up in the United States since it was declared independent, in 1776, but how adults conceive of (and therefore legislate and interpret) children and childhood constantly changes to fit current circumstances.  The experiences of children themselves have varied not only in terms of race, class, gender, and religion but also depending on specific events (i.e., coming of age during the Civil War versus the Civil Rights movement) or geography (i.e., growing up in rural Hawaii vs. urban New Jersey).  We cannot cover all of those histories in one course, so this seminar course instead focuses on exploring the interplay of ideas about children and the expressed or historical experiences of children.  When the puritans and plantations members (slave, bonded and free) came to the Atlantic shore, they brought with them particular ideas about what is meant to be a child, and to experience childhood.  They encountered already established residents who also had ideas about childhood.  How did those concepts adjust/meld/contrast over time, and how do we see those ideas reflected or reshaped by actual experiences?  This course engages particular lines of inquiry:  How and why do understanding about what is "natural" for children change over time?  How do variables like race, class, gender, etc., uphold effects the manifesting of such concepts?  What is the role of the state in children's lives and how has that changed over time?  What is the impact of mass culture on modern childhood? Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 389	History of Zionism	3 Units	This course seeks to elucidate the major strands of Zionism, their origins, how they have interacted, and their impact on contemporary Israeli society.  These may include political Zionism, cultural Zionism, socialist (labor) Zionism, Revisionist Zionism, and religious Zionism.  This course will also examine the differences in the appeal of Zionism to Jews in different places, such as Western Europe, Eastern Europe and the United States. Offered as HSTY 389 and JDST 389. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 393	Advanced Readings in the History of Race	3 Units	This course examines the concept of race as a social construction that carries political and economic implications.  We begin by examining the histories of the early racial taxonomists (e.g., Bernier, Linnaeus, and Blumenbach among others) and the contexts that informed their writings.  We then assess how the concept of race changed from the nineteenth to the twentieth century in the United States.  We conclude by evaluating how the ideology of race has influenced U.S. domestic life and foreign policy at specific historical moments. Offered as AFST 393, HSTY 393, HSTY 493, and ETHS 393. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 395	History of Medicine	3 Units	This course treats selected topics in the history of medicine, with an emphasis on social and cultural history.  Focusing on the modern period, we examine illnesses, patients, and healers, with attention to the ways sickness and medicine touch larger questions of politics, social relations and identity. Offered as HSTY 395 and HSTY 495.
HSTY 396	Advanced Topics in History	3 Units	Advanced topics in history, changing from semester to semester.  The course provides students an opportunity to explore special themes or theoretical issues in history that are too briefly covered in broader surveys.  Students may take this course more than once for credit, when different topics are covered. Offered as HSTY 396 and HSTY 496.
HSTY 397	Undergraduate Tutorial	1 - 3 Units	Individual instruction with members of the history faculty. Recommended preparation: 12 hours of History.
HSTY 398	Senior Research Seminar	3 Units	Training in the nature and methods of historical writing and research. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: Majors only, Senior standing.
HSTY 399	Advanced Readings in Black History	3 Units	This is an advanced readings course that may change from semester to semester.  This course will provide students with an opportunity to more deeply explore special themes and theoretical issues in the field of black history that are often quickly and briefly covered in broad survey courses.  Readings may be organized around specific topics such as resistance and social protest, black intellectual history, black nationalism and identity, black film and historical literacy black cultural forms and politics, black urban history, or some such other combination.  Students may take this course more than once and receive credit as long as the course topic differs.  Students should contact the History Department for more details on course content during any given semester.   Offered as AFST 399, ETHS 391, HSTY 399 and HSTY 499.
HSTY 404	Introduction to the Nonprofit Sector	3 Units	The United States has by far the largest and most important "nonprofit sector" in the world, a sector consisting of voluntary non-governmental organizations that provide health care, education and social services as well as arts, religious, and advocacy activities.  Using mostly primary sources, this course considers the significance of the nonprofit sector in the U.S., its advantages and disadvantages, its uses for different groups of Americans, and current trends. Students have the option of writing either a standard term paper, or a study of strategic challenges facing a contemporary nonprofit organization. Offered as HSTY 204 and HSTY 404. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Prereq: Graduate standing or instructor permission.
HSTY 406	History of Museums: Theory and Reality	3 Units	This course is an intensive summer internship (10 hours per week) at the Western Reserve Historical Society, complemented by extensive readings in museum/archival theory and public historical perception. It is designed both to introduce students to museum/archival work and to compare theoretical concepts with actual museum situations. Interns will be assigned a specific project within one of the Society's curatorial or administrative divisions, but will have the opportunity to work on ancillary tasks throughout the Historical Society's headquarters in University Circle. Offered as HSTY 306 and HSTY 406. Prereq: Graduate standing or instructor permission.
HSTY 410	Seminar: Early American Historiography	3 Units	This seminar examines the historiography of early America. It is designed to acquaint history doctoral students with the major themes, methods, and scholars of American history from the seventeenth century to the mid-nineteenth century. Students will be expected to read and report on major works in the field. Prereq: Graduate standing or instructor permission.
HSTY 411	Seminar: Modern American Historiography	3 Units	This seminar examines the approaches that professional historians of the United States have taken to the writing of American history in the past fifty years, with emphasis on changes in historical concerns, master debates among historians, and contemporary interests.  Topics covered include national politics and government, economic development, social history, the history of ethnicity, race, and gender, and foreign policy and international relations.  Each student will read widely and will prepare a series of reports on selected books and authors. Offered as HSTY 311 and HSTY 411. Prereq: Graduate standing or instructor permission.
HSTY 413	Comparative White Supremacy	3 Units	White supremacy is a set of assumptions, ideas, and practices that pervade the globe. Far from an outgrowth of something inscrutable like "hate" or "human nature," white supremacy emerged in history amid specific circumstances. Topics will include colonialism, slave trades, the history of the nation state, scientific racism, Social Darwinism, and institutionalized racism in liberal democracies. It will be globally-comparative, focusing on former "white settler colonies." Having taken the class, seminar participants will understand whence today's manifestations of white supremacy came. Put another way, hope for dismantling white supremacy depends on understanding its historical footings. Offered as HSTY 313 and HSTY 413. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 420	Alexander the Great: Materials and Methods	3 Units	This course is the Classics Departmental Seminar in the SAGES sequence (normally taken in the Spring semester of a major's Junior year), though it can also be taken for regular credit in Classics or History by both undergraduate and graduate students. The seminar offers students a firm grounding in the disciplines of Classics and Ancient Near East and Egyptian Studies with an emphasis on the diverse materials (particularly primary source material), methods and approaches that can be brought to bear on the study of Ancient Near Eastern, Egyptian, and Greco-Roman antiquity. Students will read and discuss the ancient sources and contemporary scholarship on the enigmatic Alexander the Great drawn from various fields of Classics, the Ancient Near East and Egypt, including history, archaeology, art history, philosophy, gender studies, epigraphy, numismatics, and the reception of Alexander. Based upon this, they will then write a research paper that employs conventions found in the field of Classics and Ancient Near East and Egyptian Studies. Much of this training, however, will also be transferable to other fields and periods. Because the scope of the seminar moves (along with Alexander himself) beyond Europe and examines the historical foundations of the antagonism between East and West, this course qualifies as a Global and Cultural Diversity course. Offered as ANEE 316, CLSC 320, CLSC 420, HSTY 320 and HSTY 420. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 421	Epidemics in History	3 Units	The history of epidemics and pandemics, focusing on select cases. Topics will include social origins of epidemics, the evolution of scientific responses, stigma and blame, the comparative study of political and state responses, social and cultural effects of epidemics, and the representation of infectious disease in fiction.
HSTY 423	Fascism in America	3 Units	In recent years, there is a growing public discussion about the rise of fascist trends and movements in America. This course will explore the historic roots of this discussion, focusing on the period between the late nineteenth century and McCarthyism in the early 1950s. Using both primary and secondary sources, we will examine in class the origins and manifestations of fascist ideas in the American context, looking at topics such as government repression, racism, nativism, the rise of the surveillance state, red scares, and immigration persecution. Students will engage in thinking of the long history of undemocratic forces in America and their place in American culture, as well as how their legacies shape our political landscape today. Offered as HSTY 323 and HSTY 423.
HSTY 428	Comparative Perspectives on Museum and Archive History and Practice	3 Units	Comparative Perspectives on Archives and Museum History and Practice is a distance learning based course shared with students at Bilkent University in Ankara, Turkey.  The course focuses on a comparison of the history and development of archives and museums in the United States and in late Ottoman and Republican Turkey.  Topics considered include the "ownership" of culture; state vs. private control of heritage; marketing of museums; and the impact of evolving technologies on the presentation and preservation of culture.  Students work together via a shared, live lecture format.  In addition to the instructor, museum and archive professionals from both the US and Turkey provide lectures and lead discussions during the semester.  The primary intellectual product of the course is a final paper/project which compares the history, operational structure, and mission of a museum/archive in the US with a similar institution in Turkey.  The paper/project is created by collaborative effort between a student at CWRU and one at Bilkent.  Provided grant funding is available, the course may involve exchange visits to Turkey and the US. Offered as HSTY 328 and HSTY 428. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 433	Reading Capital: Political Economy in the Age of Modern Industry	3 Units	Since its first publication in German in 1867, and its appearance in English in 1886, Karl Marx's Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume I, has occupied a seminal position in European thought.  Beginning with the presumptions of classical liberal political economy, Marx employed his technique of the materialist dialectic to unmask, in his view, the contradictions and structural limitations that the capitalist mode of production imposed upon capitalists and proletarians alike.  Much mentioned, but seldom read, Volume I of Capital remains a crucial window into understanding the intellectual, economic, social, and cultural currents of the 19th century, and its impact extends into the 21st .  This course consists of a close, directed reading of the entire text of this volume, combined with discussion, research, and coordinated exploration, so that students can bring this powerful critique to bear on their reading of history and economics in the modern era. Offered as HSTY 333 and HSTY 433. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 437	Ancient Medicine	3 Units	This course offers a general survey of the history of medicine from its origins in pre-historical times to Galen (2nd c. CE) with a view to gaining a better understanding of the path that eventually lead to modern medical practice. The various medical systems considered, including the ancient Babylonian, Egyptian, Jewish, Chinese, Ayurvedic, Greek and Roman traditions, will be examined through the study of primary and secondary sources, while key conceptual developments and practices are identified within their cultural and social context. Special issues, such as epidemics, women's medicine, and surgery, are also explored and discussed. Offered as ANEE 337, CLSC 337, CLSC 437, HSTY 337, and HSTY 437. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 439	Freud and the Psychoanalytic Movement	3 Units	This is a course in the social history of ideas, which will examine the roots and development of psychoanalysis, and consider several major post-Freudian innovators. It will conclude with interpretations of the social context and social effects of psychoanalysis. Offered as HSTY 239 and HSTY 439.
HSTY 440	Science and Society Through Literature	3 Units	This course will examine the interaction of scientific investigation and discovery with the society it occurred in. What is the effect of science on society and, as importantly, what is the effect of society on science? An introduction will consider the heliocentric controversy with focus on Galileo. Two broad areas, tuberculosis and the Frankenstein myth, will then be discussed covering the period 1800-present. With tuberculosis, fiction, art and music will be examined to understand the changing views of society towards the disease, how society's perception of tuberculosis victims changed, and how this influenced their treatments and research. With Frankenstein, the original novel in its historical context will be examined. Using fiction and film, the transformation of the original story into myth with different connotations and implications will be discussed. Most classes will be extensive discussions coupled with student presentations of assigned materials. Offered as PHRM 340, BETH 440, PHRM 440, and HSTY 440.
HSTY 443	Racial Capitalism	3 Units	This course examines the utility of the concept of racial capitalism. What is racial capitalism and does the term help us conceptualize how capitalism actually works or does it conflate and confuse distinct forms of oppression? Through readings that explore the relationship between capitalism and race, we will seek to better understand the origins of capitalism, the history of commodifying enslaved laborers, the making of legally free workforces, and the ideologies that rationalize the super exploitation of racialized citizens and noncitizens. Offered as HSTY 343 and HSTY 443. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 445	The Modern European City	3 Units	An examination of social, cultural, political, economic, and architectural and urban planning aspects of life in European cities in nineteenth and twentieth centuries.  The principal focus will be the transition of medieval and early modern cities to modern metropolises, both spatially and socially. Case studies may include London, Paris, Berlin, Vienna, Rome, Moscow, and cities in East-Central Europe, among others. Offered as HSTY 345 and HSTY 445. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 447	WWII from the British Empire Perspective	3 Units	This lecture and discussion course gives students the opportunity to learn about the Second World War from the perspective of the British and their soldiery from around the globe. Many might come to the course with images of the American "Bands of Brothers" fighting across France in 1944. But that was the end of the war. In the beginning, it fell to the British leadership (famously embodied by Winston Churchill), British people, and to an extraordinary extent the Indian Army to withstand a pummeling at the hands of the Axis powers long enough for America to join the conflict. The course will examine those in Britain who might have preferred a move towards Fascism in the late 1930s. It will investigate why imperial subjects who lacked democracy in their own lands fought for the British in the name of democracy against totalitarianism. And it will scrutinize those in the Empire who instead sided with the Axis. In sum, students will have an opportunity to learn what led to those many moments of choice and chance that led to Allied victory and the defeat of Fascism. Offered as HSTY 237 and HSTY 447. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 448	History of Modern Political and Social Thought	3 Units	This course explores the responses of philosophers, economic theorists, culture critics, and public policy makers to changes in western society wrought by industrialization by focusing on their concerns with technological change. Offered as HSTY 348, HSTY 448 and POSC 348.
HSTY 453	Women in American History I	3 Units	The images and realities of women's social, political, and economic lives in early America. Uses primary documents and biographers to observe individuals and groups of women in relation to legal, religious, and social restrictions. Offered as HSTY 353, WGST 353, and HSTY 453. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Graduate standing or instructor permission.
HSTY 454	Women in American History II	3 Units	With HSTY 353, forms a two-semester introduction to women's studies. The politics of suffrage and the modern woman's efforts to balance marriage, motherhood, and career. (HSTY 353 not a prerequisite.) Offered as HSTY 354, WGST 354, and HSTY 454. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Graduate standing or instructor permission.
HSTY 459	Books as Bombs: Books that Reshaped American Culture	3 Units	Every now and again a piece of prose profoundly reshapes American society and culture. In this advanced undergraduate seminar, students will read and discuss a selection of such works under the tutelage of Professors Shulman, a specialist in the History of Science and Technology, and Sentilles, who specializes in social and cultural history. The professors will set up the context of the work's publication or creation and then lead the class in a lively dissection of both the work and its impact. The main question asked of each book is "how and why did this work have such an effect?" In attempting to answer that question, students will come to a greater understanding of society that created and then responded to each work. Offered as HSTY 359 and HSTY 459. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar.
HSTY 463	Gender and Sexuality in America	3 Units	This multicultural seminar uses a mixture of historical text, gender theory, personal biography, and artistic expression to explore changing notions of gender and sexuality over the past two centuries in the United States. Offered as HSTY 363, HSTY 463 and WGST 363. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 468	North American Environmental History	3 Units	This course introduces major questions and approaches in the study of environmental history.  Taking North American as our subject, we explore how humans have shaped the environment of the continent and how human history has, in turn been shaped by the natural world form antiquity to the present.  Major topics include Pleistocene extinctions, the Columbian exchange, the market revolution in agriculture, American epidemics, industrialization, the origins of conservation, the environmental movement, and the globalization of America's environmental footprint.   Offered as HSTY 378 and HSTY 468. Prereq: Graduate standing or instructor permission.
HSTY 470	Historiography, Method, and Theory	3 Units	a graduate level survey of fundamental themes in historiography, method, and theory, as well as interdisciplinary methods and theories. Prereq: Graduate standing or instructor permission.
HSTY 473	Women and Medicine in the United States	3 Units	Students in this seminar will investigate the experiences of American women as practitioners and as patients.  We will meet weekly in the Dittrick Medical Museum for discussion of texts and use artifacts from the museum's collection.  After a unit exploring how the female body was viewed by medical theorists from the Galenic period to the nineteenth-century, we will look at midwives, college-trained female doctors and nurses, and health advocacy among poor populations.  We will then look at women's experiences in terms of menstruation, childbearing, and menopause, before exploring the cultural relationship between women and psychological disorders. Offered as HSTY 373, HSTY 473, and WGST 373. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: Graduate standing or instructor permission.
HSTY 474	Race and Medicine	3 Units	Race, racism, and medicine have long been intertwined. Medicine has had a major role in the formation of the concept of race, and racism has had important roles in the development of modern medicine, and in the production of health inequalities. This course looks at the history of these relationships. Designed for graduate students interested in African and African American Studies. It emphasizes African and African American history, though there will be opportunities for students who wish to explore other aspects of race, ethnicity, medicine. Topics will include the medical construction of race, African medical systems, medicine and slavery, human experimentation, health and segregation, anti-racist medicine, and continuing problems of health inequality.
HSTY 476	Seminar in Comparative History	3 Units	An introduction to comparative method for historians.  The topics will vary year to year, but the course will require exposure to historical contexts outside of the United States. Prereq: Graduate standing or instructor permission.
HSTY 477	Modern Policy History of the United States	3 Units	This course offers a historical perspective on policy and policy making in the United States since the late nineteenth century.  It emphasizes the increasing role of the federal government, the persisting importance of the states, the significance of the courts, the revolutionary impact of the women's and civil rights movements, and the consequences of the growth and transformation of the American economy.  Each student selects a policy area for detailed exploration; students often choose topics related to civil rights, women's rights, health care, environmental reform, non-profit and non-governmental organizations, the arts, and education, but other topics are also appropriate. Prereq: Graduate standing or instructor permission.
HSTY 479	Historical Research and Writing	3 Units	Research seminar for graduate students.  Intensive focus on processes of historical research and writing.  Students produce conference paper and research paper based on primary sources. Prereq: Graduate standing or instructor permission.
HSTY 493	Advanced Readings in the History of Race	3 Units	This course examines the concept of race as a social construction that carries political and economic implications.  We begin by examining the histories of the early racial taxonomists (e.g., Bernier, Linnaeus, and Blumenbach among others) and the contexts that informed their writings.  We then assess how the concept of race changed from the nineteenth to the twentieth century in the United States.  We conclude by evaluating how the ideology of race has influenced U.S. domestic life and foreign policy at specific historical moments. Offered as AFST 393, HSTY 393, HSTY 493, and ETHS 393. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
HSTY 495	History of Medicine	3 Units	This course treats selected topics in the history of medicine, with an emphasis on social and cultural history.  Focusing on the modern period, we examine illnesses, patients, and healers, with attention to the ways sickness and medicine touch larger questions of politics, social relations and identity. Offered as HSTY 395 and HSTY 495. Prereq: Graduate standing or instructor permission.
HSTY 496	Advanced Topics in History	3 Units	Advanced topics in history, changing from semester to semester.  The course provides students an opportunity to explore special themes or theoretical issues in history that are too briefly covered in broader surveys.  Students may take this course more than once for credit, when different topics are covered. Offered as HSTY 396 and HSTY 496.
HSTY 497	Graduate Independent Study	1 - 3 Units	Independent reading and research programs with individual members of the faculty.
HSTY 499	Advanced Readings in Black History	3 Units	This is an advanced readings course that may change from semester to semester.  This course will provide students with an opportunity to more deeply explore special themes and theoretical issues in the field of black history that are often quickly and briefly covered in broad survey courses.  Readings may be organized around specific topics such as resistance and social protest, black intellectual history, black nationalism and identity, black film and historical literacy black cultural forms and politics, black urban history, or some such other combination.  Students may take this course more than once and receive credit as long as the course topic differs.  Students should contact the History Department for more details on course content during any given semester.   Offered as AFST 399, ETHS 391, HSTY 399 and HSTY 499. Prereq: Graduate standing or instructor permission.
HSTY 601	Independent Studies	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
HSTY 651	Thesis M.A.	1 - 18 Units	(Credit as arranged.)
HSTY 701	Dissertation Ph.D.	1 - 9 Units	(Credit as arranged.)  Limited to Ph.D. candidates actively engaged in the research and writing of their dissertations. Prereq: Predoctoral research consent or advanced to Ph.D. candidacy milestone.
HUMN 101	Colloquium in the Humanities	1 Unit	A multi-disciplinary and interdisciplinary introduction to the humanities, which explores the multiple possibilities for working across disciplinary boundaries.  The course will include meetings with faculty from across the humanities at the university.   Colloquium meetings will consist of discussion of prepared readings; an introduction to Baker-Nord Center programs, including Humanities@Work; an introduction to the cultural institutions of University Circle and Cleveland; and meetings with visiting speakers.  Course open only to Baker-Nord Scholars in the Humanities.
HUMN 201	The Public Humanities	3 Units	Public scholarship is a vital component of CWRU's mission to improve and enrich society through research that capitalizes on the power of collaboration. This course is designed to harness that power by bringing together students from across different humanities departments and by facilitating deep engagement through experiential learning. Throughout the semester, students will work individually and collaboratively towards projects that enhance the public humanities in greater Cleveland.  In this collaborative classroom environment, students will combine their disciplinary expertise and personal interests with our course readings and seminar discussions. The first half of the semester focuses on theories and methods for cultivating the public humanities. The second half of the semester allows students to test and apply their knowledge by imagining how they would curate future programming in the public humanities.
HUMN 212	Interrogating Information: Research and Writing for a Digital Public	3 Units	Current scientific and technological innovations inspire a need to weigh and evaluate information like never before, and navigating the digital world has become a critically important skill. In other words, we must interrogate information instead of passively receiving it as we encounter news, research, and everyday communications. Digital Literacy skills provide the tools needed to ethically apply information to participants' academic lives and beyond. This course will help students develop the research and writing skills needed to efficiently and effectively evaluate, use, and contribute information to the digital landscape. In this course, we will visit topics and tools in mass use, such as Google, Wikipedia, and social media, in order to frame those platforms within larger social and cultural contexts. These platforms' worldwide reach draws together a global audience which students will interact with to varying degrees through the creation and editing of Wikipedia entries, as well as generating blog posts and examining social media outlets. Work will culminate in a portfolio of written materials as well as a student-led Wikipedia Edit-a-thon to put students' Digital Literacy skills to the test and to share those skills with others.
HUMN 224	Cleveland, Humanities, Collaboration: Research Communities	1 Unit	What is collaborative inquiry in the humanities? This seminar explores collaborative and cross-disciplinary methodologies in the humanities, paying special attention to critical research resources and practices that support community-based, public humanities projects and programming. This seminar will provide a space to expand upon a research project from prior or current coursework while experimenting with collaborative modes of research, writing, feedback, and presentation. In the process, students will also develop relevant skills that serve to secure meaningful internships and other summer research opportunities or employment in humanities-related fields. Prereq or Coreq: SAGES First Seminar or FSTS 100.
HUMN 225	Cleveland, Humanities, Collaboration: Leadership Values and Skills	1 Unit	How do the humanities shape leadership values?  How can the next generation of humanities leaders make the values of diversity and sustainability more central to their organizations? In this one-credit experiential engagement course, students reflect on these questions through a combination of seminar readings and direct conversations with former humanities students who are now in leadership positions at museums, corporations, nonprofits, and community organizations. Over the course of the semester, the students also work collaboratively to broaden their own leadership skills, including through networking, informational interviews, public speaking, career benchmarks, and short writing assignments.  Over the course of the semester, students will:  - Critically examine the role of the humanities in shaping leadership values - Present their expertise confidently through both live and pre-recorded formats - Explain their social and intellectual values in succinct and engaging ways - Work as teams to network in support of their individual postgraduate goals Prereq: Successful completion of FSTS 100 or SAGES First Seminar.
HUMN 226	Cleveland, Humanities, Collaboration: Sharing Discoveries	1 Unit	How do you effectively communicate your humanities research and education to multiple publics? In this seminar, we will explore the practice of translation, paying particular attention to the various modes of writing and communication that enable humanities scholars to communicate both the value and significance of their humanities research and education. This seminar will provide a space to develop your writing and scholarly portfolio while also experimenting with different modes of translation including blog posts, opinion editorials, resumes, grant writing, and digital portfolios. In the process, the seminar will further develop relevant skills that serve to secure meaningful internships and other summer research opportunities or employment in humanities-related fields. Prereq: Passing letter grade in SAGES First Seminar or FSTS 100.
HUMN 305	Coding for the Humanities: Python, Natural Language Processing, and Machine Learning	3 Units	An entry-level, humanities-oriented introduction to coding and natural language processing (NLP) with a focus on textual analysis. New technologies are radically transforming education and scholarship in the humanities, not to mention in higher education generally. In order to participate meaningfully in this changing landscape, humanities students and educators need to engage new forms of scholarship and teaching focused on technological experimentation and creative design. Such is the primary goal of this praxis-oriented course: to provide humanities students with hands-on access to emerging computational methods, to empower them to experiment, design, and build with them, and to foster critical reflection on issues and questions as they arise in that process. Offered as HUMN 305 and HUMN 405.
HUMN 316	Methods in Public Humanities and Civic Engagement	3 Units	Who has access to knowledge and why? How is knowledge produced and publicized? What and where is the public? Who is included and excluded in this public?  What is the role of art and culture in various publics? This innovative new course will address these questions as it introduces students to the theories and methods of the Public Humanities and Civic Engagement. Broadly defined, Public Humanities works to engage diverse publics in the subjects of the humanities by making topics like art history, literary history, film, and theater, accessible and understandable to a wider civic audience, but it also interrogates the concept of the expert and seeks to find experts in the field, rather than exclusively in the academy.  Through a combination of reading, discussion, and virtual (or in person) visits from leaders of Cleveland-area organizations, administrators, legislators, and public historians, this course will teach you how to put your degrees to work for the greater good! Although this course is about Public Humanities & Civic Engagement, it is open to students in all fields across the university who are interested in ways to integrate the community in their education and to think creatively about the types of work their academic training prepares them to do. Undergraduate and graduate students will benefit from opportunities to broaden their professional networks and to learn more about the kinds of skills that are necessary in professions across the disciplines. Offered as ARTH 316, ARTH 416, HUMN 316, and HUMN 416.
HUMN 405	Coding for the Humanities: Python, Natural Language Processing, and Machine Learning	3 Units	An entry-level, humanities-oriented introduction to coding and natural language processing (NLP) with a focus on textual analysis. New technologies are radically transforming education and scholarship in the humanities, not to mention in higher education generally. In order to participate meaningfully in this changing landscape, humanities students and educators need to engage new forms of scholarship and teaching focused on technological experimentation and creative design. Such is the primary goal of this praxis-oriented course: to provide humanities students with hands-on access to emerging computational methods, to empower them to experiment, design, and build with them, and to foster critical reflection on issues and questions as they arise in that process. Offered as HUMN 305 and HUMN 405.
HUMN 416	Methods in Public Humanities and Civic Engagement	3 Units	Who has access to knowledge and why? How is knowledge produced and publicized? What and where is the public? Who is included and excluded in this public?  What is the role of art and culture in various publics? This innovative new course will address these questions as it introduces students to the theories and methods of the Public Humanities and Civic Engagement. Broadly defined, Public Humanities works to engage diverse publics in the subjects of the humanities by making topics like art history, literary history, film, and theater, accessible and understandable to a wider civic audience, but it also interrogates the concept of the expert and seeks to find experts in the field, rather than exclusively in the academy.  Through a combination of reading, discussion, and virtual (or in person) visits from leaders of Cleveland-area organizations, administrators, legislators, and public historians, this course will teach you how to put your degrees to work for the greater good! Although this course is about Public Humanities & Civic Engagement, it is open to students in all fields across the university who are interested in ways to integrate the community in their education and to think creatively about the types of work their academic training prepares them to do. Undergraduate and graduate students will benefit from opportunities to broaden their professional networks and to learn more about the kinds of skills that are necessary in professions across the disciplines. Offered as ARTH 316, ARTH 416, HUMN 316, and HUMN 416.
HUMN 422	Humanities Teaching Careers at Community Colleges	0 Unit	This course is designed to give CWRU graduate students in the humanities, arts, and humanistic social sciences an introduction to teaching careers at community colleges.  Topics will include: student and faculty life; course design and assessment; online, hybrid, and dual-enrollment teaching; community engagement; and research, tenure, and career paths within community colleges.
MIDS 301	Introduction to Information: A Systems and Design Approach	3 Units	This course is an introduction to the concept of information and the uses of information in organizations and social life.  The  course is for anyone who is interested in the evolution of digital culture and the influence of design, systems, and management in contemporary life.  This will involve readings from a variety of disciplines, including mathematics, the social sciences, management and the humanities.  We live in an "information ecology":  a system of human activities served by a variety of technologies that are often grounded in local environments and with deep ethical implications.  The goal of our course is to understand this system and how information has become a medium of human experience in our lives.  There will be useful readings, but also exercises and projects that enable students to test and develop their understanding.
INQU 202	Introduction to Medicine: Patient Assessment	1.5 Unit	This course introduces the student to professional patient interaction and evaluation in a simulated environment. Students will develop interview techniques, learn patient appraisal skills, and techniques for communicating effectively in a health care environment. Students will experience patient interviews and assessment in a simulated environment with live patients.
IIME 400	Leadership Assessment and Development (LEAD)	3 Units	The goal of the course is to help students learn methods for assessing their knowledge, abilities, and values relevant to engineering and management, and for the acquiring of new professional knowledge and skills throughout their career. Recommended preparation: Senior status in engineering.
IIME 405	Project Management	3 Units	Project Management is concerned with the management and control of a group of interrelated tasks required to be completed in an efficient and timely manner for the successful accomplishment of the objectives of the project. Since each project is usually unique in terms of task structure, risk characteristics and objectives, the management of projects is significantly different from the management of repetitive processes designed to produce a series of similar products or outputs. Large-scale projects are characterized by a significant commitment of organizational and economic resources coupled with a high degree of uncertainty. Thus, the objective of the course is to understand what are the main issues and problems in the management of projects and to have a thorough knowledge of the conceptual models and techniques available to deal with them. Recommended preparation: Senior status in engineering.
IIME 410	Accounting, Finance, and Engineering Economics	3 Units	This class uses a combination of class lecture and discussion, in combination with problem-type and case-type assignments, to introduce you to key concepts and tools of financial economics.  You are expected to use the resources at your disposal, such as the textbook or the accounting dictionary, to help you understand any unfamiliar concepts.  Normally, each class will be divided into two sections.  The first part of each class session will be devoted to discussions of selected problems and cases, with focus on the specific topics being covered. The second part of each class will be devoted to prepare you for the following session class assignments. Recommended preparation: Senior status in engineering.
IIME 411	New Venture Finance	3 Units	This course explores the financing and financial management of entrepreneurial new ventures. The course will focus on issues of financial management of new ventures (forecasting cash flows, cash flow management, valuation, capital structure) and the various financial methods and mechanisms available to entrepreneurs (bootstrapping, angel investors, venture capitalists, IPOs).  This course is highly complementary to the existing IIME 410 Finance course which only briefly covers venture finance.
IIME 413	Strategic Intelligence for Technology Commercialization	3 Units	The accelerating rate at which major corporations are failing evidences the fact that longstanding assumptions regarding successful strategic planning are being challenged by the increasing rate of disruptive technological innovation.  This course unpacks a toolbox of strategic planning methodologies to help students understand how to identify the core requirements of a durable business strategy from which investment (BAFI 460) and corporate risk management (MSFC 432) strategies would follow. The course focuses on the particular challenges faced by established corporations as opposed to entrepreneurial startups.  It uses workshops to provide hands on experience in applying the tools to real world problems corporations are facing today.
IIME 415	Materials and Manufacturing Processes	3 Units	A survey course on contemporary and modern materials and their processing, the course begins with a review of traditional materials, including metals, ceramics, plastics, and composites. The evolution of the materials will be traced from their beginnings as raw resources and precursors to finished products.  Topics will emphasize modern manufacturing methods and materials.  Traditional and modern tools for materials and process characterization will be an important part of the course.  Special attention will be directed to examples of statistical methodology and information technology.  Visits to local industries and presentations by participating companies will reinforce the information presented in the classroom. Recommended preparation: Senior status in engineering.
IIME 419	Entrepreneurship and The Good Life	3 Units	Entrepreneurship and business ownership is how most wealth is created. Pursuing the "Good Life", when done effectively, leads to wealth and fulfillment. Wealth, like happiness & fulfillment, is not to be pursued directly, it ensues as a result of living a life of positive impact for others. We will explore two primary entrepreneurial strategies used to create value for others, Entrepreneurship Through Acquisition and Real Estate as attractive alternatives to Startups (traditionally equated with "entrepreneurship").  We will explore these topics with real entrepreneur guests who will share their experience and strategies with the class.  This course employs an active learning approach, based on the belief that the best way to learn is through a progression of real world insights rather than a list of policies and practices delivered via long lectures. Offered as DESN 419 and IIME 419. Prereq: Enrolled in the Master of Engineering and Management program.
IIME 420	Information, Design and Systems	3 Units	Everything about a business is designed, including the ways in which the organization uses information and the systems it uses to create and deliver its products and services, its supply chains, its ways of accounting for its use of resources, how it relates to its employees, industry and customers , and more. Understanding general principles that guide the design and use of systems, using systems effectively, and redesigning them to address changing circumstances are the foci of this course. This course will use readings, discussion, projects and occasional lectures to explore principles, methods, attitudes and tools that can be helpful to managers.
IIME 424	Chief Executive Officer	3 Units	This course will take the perspective of the CEO in deciding the actions that lead to sustainable competitive advantage.  We will study decisions that span from starting a small business to expanding beyond the core using mergers and acquisitions.  We will also study how CEOs decide to exit a market.  The successful CEO not only has to design the strategy for success but has to also design an execution plan.  As the organization grows the importance of delegation to the right subordinates becomes increasingly critical.  The course material includes case studies, decision briefs and presentations (virtual and in person) by senior executives.  Decision briefs are short notes that have the same information that the CEOs had when starting the business.  You will develop the strategy based on these decision briefs and will compare your suggestions to what was actually done by both successful and unsuccessful CEOs. Offered as DESN 425 and IIME 424. Prereq: Enrolled in the Master of Engineering and Management program.
IIME 425	Understanding People and Change in Organizations	3 Units	This course is intended to help students assess events occurring in organizations from a behavioral and human resources perspective and to help them develop strategies for managing these events. The course applies knowledge from the fields of organizational behavior and human resource management to provide an understanding and the skills needed to be effective in organizations.  The fields of Organizational Behavior and Human Resource Management are devoted to the study of how human beings act in organized settings and how organizations can affect human behavior through a variety of policies, practices, structures, and strategies. In today's environment, organizations are faced with high levels of international competition and an increasing pace of technological, market, and social changes.  As an organizational member, you are expected to successfully operate within these increasingly complex demands as well as help create and guide change.  The purpose of this course is to provide you with the framework and tools needed to analyze and operate in the changing organization.  We will examine some of the features that characterize an emerging organizational form and contrast this to its traditional predecessor.  The focus of the course will be on the skills you will need to operate in the "new" organization including skills for being a change agent working in entry level and early career managerial roles. Recommended preparation: Accredited Bachelor's in Engineering plus summer job experience. Prereq: Enrolled in the Master of Engineering and Management program.
IIME 430	Product and Process Design, Development, and Delivery	3 Units	An integrated approach to the teaching of the complex relationship of customer to designer and to manufacturer, this course will be taught by faculty from WSOM and CSE, with participation of corporate representatives sponsoring projects for the teams. The course will be built on a series of projects, each emphasizing different aspects of the product/process design experience, selected to provide exposure to a wide variety of entrepreneurial activities. The project activities are expected to promote the development of realistic activities of cross-functional teams. Prereq: Master of Engineering and Management students only.
IIME 430A	Product Design and Development I	3 Units	An integrated approach to the teaching of the complex relationship of customer to designer and to manufacturer, this course will be team taught by faculty from WSOM and CSE, with participation of corporate representatives sponsoring projects for the teams.  The course will be built on a series of projects, each emphasizing different aspects of the product/process design experience, selected to provide exposure to a wide variety of entrepreneurial activities.  The project activities are expected to promote the development of realistic activities of cross-functional teams. Recommended preparation: Accredited Bachelor's in Engineering plus summer job experience. Prereq: Enrolled in the Master of Engineering and Management program.
IIME 432	Operations Research and Supply Chain Management	3 Units	This course is an introduction to Operations Research, and then focusing on applying Operations Research tools to manage business and organizations' Supply Chain Operations. Operations Research (also called Management Science) is the discipline of applying advanced mathematical methods to help make better decisions. By using techniques such as mathematical modeling to analyze complex situations, Operations Research gives executives the power to make more effective decisions and build more productive systems based on considerations of all available options, careful predictions of outcomes and estimates of risk, and the latest decision tools and techniques.  Operations Research solves problems that arise in every business function (e.g., operations, finance, marketing, accounting, HR), every economy sector (e.g., financial, healthcare, industrial goods, technology, utilities), and every business type (e.g., for-profit and non-profit, start-ups and Fortune 500 companies), even government.
IIME 435	Enterprise Resource Planning in the Supply Chain	3 Units	Enterprise resource planning is the dominant system by which companies translate the needs from their customers into the detailed plans that the company must perform to meet the customer needs, and the resulting support the company will need from its suppliers.  As such, it is a central player in the process of supply chain management.  In this course, we study both the quantitative and qualitative concepts and techniques to help manage a company's operations to perform these important translation and planning tasks in order to help the company be successful.  The quantitative analysis will be supported by microcomputer software available in the Weatherhead computer lab.  Student teams complete a series of integrated case studies from the same company to vividly see the relationships between various planning and control activities.  A major emphasis during the course is the design of processes and procedures (algorithms) for solving very complex (wicked) problems as a part of both class discussions and while working on case studies, as well as critiquing the designs so as to clearly understand their limitations.
IIME 440	Six Sigma and Quality Management	3 Units	The Six Sigma process is the standard for quality improvement in organizations around the globe.  In this course, we study the details of the five steps in the Six Sigma process: DEFINE, MEASURE, ANALYZE, IMPROVE, and CONTROL (DMAIC).  We introduce the concept of sustainability into the criteria to use to evaluate proposed solutions during the Six Sigma process.  Many tools, concepts, and processes that are often an integral part of Six Sigma projects in companies are included in the course content.  They range from the very basic tools of quality (such as cause-and-effect diagrams for brainstorming) to complete processes (such as benchmarking, quality function deployment, failure mode and effects analysis-FMEA).  Statistical concepts that are central to Six Sigma including statistical process control and introduction design of experiments are also included.  Once the Six Sigma process and its various components are understood, we study quality management including quality control, quality planning, quality improvement, strategic quality management, and quality strategy.  Students meeting the required standards of performance will earn a Green Belt Certification in Six Sigma and Quality Management from the Weatherhead School of Management. Prereq: Enrolled in the Master of Engineering and Management program.
IIME 446	Models of Health Care Systems	1.5 Unit	This course is for professionals who will pursue their careers in, or associated with, the health care industry; and therefore, need to understand the structure, operations and decision influences in the health care delivery system. The course is intended to develop competence and confidence in the participant's ability to understand and operate in the industry. the largest and, perhaps, the most complex in the United States. It is applicable to the private and public, profit and not-for-profit sectors. In this course students are introduced to: the different systems of care delivery; their organization and operations; their markets and the nature of the demand for their services; and the dynamics of their interoperation among themselves and with other entities in the industry (e.g., payors/insurers, regulators and accreditors, technology and pharmaceuticals suppliers). Offered as HSMC 446 and IIME 446.
IIME 447	Regulatory Affairs for the Biosciences	1.5 Unit	This mini-course introduces students to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the laws and regulations it enforces. A scientific regulatory agency with far reaching enforcement authority, FDA is the most powerful consumer protection agency in the world. This course will familiarize students with FDA's mission, philosophy and organizational structure, as well as policy and procedure it uses to ensure the safety and effectiveness of the food, drugs, biologics, cosmetics, medical devices and radiation-emitting products it regulates. Recommended preparation: Enrollment in the MEM Biomedical Entrepreneurship Track. Offered as BIOS 447, HSMC 447, and IIME 447.
IIME 450	Engineering Entrepreneurship	3 Units	Entrepreneurship is an area of importance to business leaders, educators, politicians, and individual members of the society. It is a driver of economic development and wealth creation in organizational units ranging in size from the individual company to entire nations. Technology-based entrepreneurship is particularly important to economic development due to its impact on productivity (innovations in action) and its potential for exponential growth. This course will emphasize and explore a variety of issues related to innovation and entrepreneurship, demonstrating that there are not many "absolute truths," but there are numerous best practices.  Successful students will conclude this course with new knowledge about opportunity analysis and insight on entrepreneurship & innovation, as well as having demonstrated measurable improvement in their critical thinking skills. This course is one-semester version of a course taught alternatively as a two-semester course.  Recent growth in CWRU curricula centered on entrepreneurship and related subjects enables students to specialize in, say, wealth creation, leadership, and finance topics once included under the broader two-semester umbrella.  The current Fall version of the course culminates with student projects and presentations on opportunity analysis.
IIME 470	Independent Projects	3 Units	This course is designed for students wishing to expand experiential learning opportunities at the interface of engineering and management. Preferred focus areas in entrepreneurship and opportunity assessment, product design and development, and manufacturing planning and management. Project ideas along with milestone, deliverables, and potential corporate clients need to be arranged in advance.
IIME 472	BioDesign	3 Units	Medical device innovations that would have been considered science fiction a decade ago are already producing new standards of patient care.  Innovation leading to lower cost of care, minimally invasive procedures and shorter recovery times is equally important to healthcare business leaders, educators, clinicians, and policy-makers.  Innovation is a driver of regional economic development and wealth creation in organizational units ranging in size from the start-up to the Fortune 500 companies.  In a broader context, the pace of translational research leading to product and service innovation is highly interdisciplinary, thus, new products and services result from team efforts, marked by a systematic, structured approach to bringing new medical technologies to market and impacting patient care.  In this course we examine medical technology innovations in the context of (A) addressing unmet clinical needs, (B) the process of inventing new medical devices and instruments, and (C) subsequent implementation of these advances in patient care.  In short, the student learns the process of "identify, invent, implement" in the field of BioDesign. Offered as EBME 472, IIME 472 and SYBB 472.
IIME 473	Fundamentals of Clinical Information Systems	3 Units	Technology has played a significant role in the evolution of medical science and treatment.  While we often think about progress in terms of the practical application of, say, imaging to the diagnosis and monitoring of disease, technology is increasingly expected to improve the organization and delivery of healthcare services, too.  Information technology plays a key role in the transformation of administrative support systems (finance and administration), clinical information systems (information to support patient care), and decision support systems (managerial decision-making).  This introductory graduate course provides the student with the opportunity to gain insight and situational experience with clinical information systems (CIS).  Often considered synonymous with electronic medical records, the "art" of CIS more fundamentally examines the effective use of data and information technology to assist in the migration away from paper-based systems and improve organizational performance.  In this course we examine clinical information systems in the context of (A) operational and strategic information needs, (B) information technology and analytic tools for workflow design, and (C) subsequent implementation of clinical information systems in patient care.  Legal and ethical issues are explored.  The student learns the process of "plan, design, implement" through hands-on applications to select CIS problems, while at the same time gaining insights and understanding of the impacts placed on patients and health care providers. Offered as EBME 473, IIME 473 and SYBB 421.
IIME 475	Technology Marketing Strategy	3 Units	High technology products and services are unique in the levels of ambiguity and risk that challenge a manager's ability to craft a marketing strategy.  Understanding the customer, reading market trends, creating a compelling vision of value, and launching marketing programs (already foreboding tasks in traditional marketing situations) have a heightened sense of uncertainty in the context of high technology platforms such as nanotechnology and regulated medical devices.  This course draws on contemporary ideas in literature by thought leaders in technology marketing.  We work though several marketing models and methods in practice today to assist students synthesize and build appropriate conceptual and managerial frameworks for technology marketing practice.
IIME 476	Applied Statistics for Decision Support in Data Science	3 Units	In this intense summer application-oriented course, the goal is to bridge traditional statistical tools with the R language to prepare beginning graduate students for further study in data science. Managerial decision support involves the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data for understanding uncertainty and risk in decision-making; quite simply, decision support requires statistics! The "R" language plays a significant role facilitating the building of statistical and data science models and approaches to visualizing data and making predictions to support decisions, but absent a foundational knowledge in probability and statistics the impact of the tools and their use may not be fully realized.  The course is project-based to provide direct application of probability and statistics to the extraction of knowledge from data. Prereq: Graduate level standing.
ORIG 101	Origins Prologue: Life, the Universe, and Everything	1 Unit	This one-credit course introduces students to the research interests of Origins faculty, and thereby to some of the possibilities for student research or focused study.  Topics range across cosmology, astronomy, planetary sciences, astrobiology, evolutionary biology, evolutionary cognitive science, anthropology, and evolutionary medicine.
ORIG 202	Origins II: Life in all its diversity	3 Units	An integrated introduction to the origins sciences including aspects of evolutionary biology, ecology, paleontology, physical anthropology and cognitive science. The course will generally meet at the Cleveland Museum of Natural History. Prereq: BIOL 214.
ORIG 301	Mathematical Modeling Across the Sciences	3 Units	A three credit course on mathematical modeling as it applies to the origins sciences. Students gain practical experience in a wide range of techniques for modeling research questions in cosmology and astrophysics, integrative evolutionary biology (including physical anthropology, ecology, paleontology, and evolutionary cognitive science), and planetary science and astrobiology. Offered as ORIG 301, ORIG 401 and MATH 357. Prereq: ORIG 201, ORIG 202, BIOL 225, MATH 122, CHEM 106 and (PHYS 122 or PHYS 124).
ORIG 360	Independent Study in Origins	1 - 3 Units	A 1-3 credit offering available on an ad hoc basis to students wishing to pursue in depth study in an appropriate origins topic under the supervision of a willing faculty member. Prereq: ORIG 201, ORIG 202.
ORIG 370	Research in Origins	1 - 6 Units	A 1-6 credit offering available on an ad hoc basis to students wishing to pursue independent research in an origins topic under the supervision of a willing faculty member. Offered as ORIG 370 and ORIG 470. Prereq: ORIG 201, ORIG 202, ORIG 301.
ORIG 401	Mathematical Modeling Across the Sciences	3 Units	A three credit course on mathematical modeling as it applies to the origins sciences. Students gain practical experience in a wide range of techniques for modeling research questions in cosmology and astrophysics, integrative evolutionary biology (including physical anthropology, ecology, paleontology, and evolutionary cognitive science), and planetary science and astrobiology. Offered as ORIG 301, ORIG 401 and MATH 357. Prereq: ORIG 201, ORIG 202, BIOL 225, MATH 122, CHEM 106 and (PHYS 122 or PHYS 124).
ORIG 470	Research in Origins	1 - 6 Units	A 1-6 credit offering available on an ad hoc basis to students wishing to pursue independent research in an origins topic under the supervision of a willing faculty member. Offered as ORIG 370 and ORIG 470. Prereq: ORIG 201, ORIG 202, ORIG 301.
ORIG 485	Comparative and Evolutionary Physiology	3 Units	This course presents physiological concepts from the comparative and evolutionary perspective. Aspects of vertebrate and mammalian evolution will be considered with respect to the generation of adaptive advantages for organisms to changing environmental challenges since the Cambrian. Comparative physiological concepts include scaling, variations in nutrition, energy metabolism and work efficiency.  The important influences of time, temperature, water and energy on mammalian biology will be presented.   The course is a lecture based course that can be taken in person or on-line. Evaluations will be by regular quizzes, a mid-term and a final exam, all MCQ.  Offered as PHOL 485 and ORIG 485.
IBIS 401	Integrated Biological Sciences I	1 - 9 Units	A four-semester sequence encompassing anatomy, biochemistry, physiology, pharmacology, pathology, and microbiology.
IBIS 402	Integrated Biological Sciences II	1 - 9 Units	A continuation of IBIS 401.
IBIS 403	Integrated Biological Sciences III	1 - 9 Units	A continuation of IBIS 402.
IBIS 411	Clinical Science I	2 Units	
IBIS 412	Clinical Science II	2 Units	
IBIS 413	Clinical Science III	2 Units	
IBIS 434	Integrated Biological Sciences in Medicine	3 - 6 Units	This course is open only to candidates enrolled in the M.D./M.S. program (College plan). Registration is for the Spring semester of the second year in medical school. The course content includes the areas of hematology, gastroenterology and renal physiology. Students will also be required to participate in Process of Discovery. Assessment of performance will be through reaching required levels of competency for the medical areas identified above and by the evaluation of a term paper. Recommended preparation:  First three semesters of medical school and currently a medical student in good standing.
IBIS 451	Clinical Science (for M.D./M.A. Bioethics Students)	3 Units	
IBIS 600	Exam in Biomedical Investigation	0 Unit	Students are required to pass an examination established for each student, generally reflecting the preparation and oral defense of a written report on the project.  Prereq: Must be enrolled in MD/MS Biomedical Investigation program.
MUAP 10	Progress Jury Examination	0 Unit	Progress Jury Examination (All BA and BS Music Majors)
MUAP 11	Recital Class	0 Unit	
MUAP 121	Principal Performance Area I	2 Units	Limited to music and music education majors. Recommended preparation: Entrance Jury/Audition
MUAP 122	Principal Performance Area II	2 Units	Limited to music and music education majors. Prereq: MUAP 121. Coreq: MUAP 10.
MUAP 131	Secondary Performance	1 - 2 Units	Secondary instrumental or vocal instruction (undergraduate level).  Each student has the option of taking one-hour weekly lessons (2 credit units) or half-hour weekly lessons (1 credit unit).  The applied lesson fee is waived for all music majors.  Contact the Department of Music directly for registration consent.
MUAP 20	Level 300 Applied Music Entrance Jury Exam	0 Unit	Level Jury Examination
MUAP 221	Principal Performance Area III	2 Units	Limited to music and music education majors. Prereq: (MUTH 101 or 101I) and MUAP 122 and MUAP 10. Coreq: MUTH 101 or 101I.
MUAP 222	Principal Performance Area IV	2 Units	Limited to music and music education majors. Prereq: MUAP 221.  Coreq: MUAP 20.  Prereq or Coreq: MUTH 102.
MUAP 225	Principal Performance Area VII	2 Units	Limited to music and music education majors. Prereq: MUAP 224.
MUAP 25	BA Exit Jury Examination	0 Unit	BA Exit Jury Examination (Audio and General Music Concentrations)
MUAP 30	BA Performance Exit Jury Examination	0 Unit	BA Performance Exit Jury Examination
MUAP 321	Principal Level Performance Area V	2 Units	Limited to music and music education majors. Prereq: MUAP 222 and MUAP 20. Prereq or Coreq: MUTH 201.
MUAP 322	Principal Level Performance Area VI	2 Units	Limited to music and music education majors. Prereq: MUAP 321. Prereq or Coreq: MUTH 202.
MUAP 323	Principal Performance Area VII	2 Units	Limited to music performance and music education majors.
MUAP 324	Principal Performance Area VIII	2 Units	Limited to music performance and music education majors.
MUAP 35	BS Music Education Jury Examination	0 Unit	BS Music Education Jury Examination
MUAP 500	Applied Music/Ensembles	1 - 3 Units	Registration to reflect combined participation in a number of Historical Performance Ensembles, each of which is taken for 0 credit hours.
MUAP 521	Principal Performance Area IX	0 - 3 Units	Limited to music and music education majors.
MUAP 522	Principal Performance Area IX	0 - 3 Units	Limited to music and music education majors.
MUAP 523	Principal Performance Area IX	0 - 3 Units	Limited to music and music education majors.
MUAP 524	Principal Performance Area IX	0 - 3 Units	Limited to music and music education majors.
MUAP 525	Principal Performance Area IX	0 - 3 Units	Limited to music and music education majors.
MUAP 526	Principal Performance Area IX	0 - 3 Units	Limited to music and music education majors.
MUAP 531	Secondary Performance	0 - 3 Units	Secondary instrumental or vocal instruction (graduate level).  Each student not majoring in music has the option of taking one-hour weekly lessons (2 credit units) or half-hour weekly lessons (1 credit unit).  Graduate students in music may be advised by their program advisor to take this course for variable credit (0-3 units).  The applied lesson fee is waived for all music majors.  Contact the Department of Music directly for registration consent.
MUAP 600	Historical Performance Progress Jury	0 Unit	Historical Performance Progress Jury, generally taken at the end of the second semester.
MUAP 601	Principal Performance Lessons	3 Units	
MUAP 604	Principal Performance Area IV	3 Units	
MUAP 605	DMA Principal Performance V	3 Units	
MUAP 606	Principal Performance VI	3 Units	
MUAP 651	M.A. Lecture - Recital and Document	3 - 6 Units	M.A. Lecture - Recital for students in Historical Performance Practice.
MUAP 698	Historical Performance Practice Studio Class	0 Unit	This course is intended to provide a weekly opportunity for students to perform in front of their peers, CWRU faculty, and guest coaches; to discuss and critique the performances of their colleagues; and to receive feedback and advice.
MUAP 699	Historical Performance Practicum	0 Unit	This course is intended to give graduate students in the historical performance practice program the opportunity to rehearse and perform in concert with a non-CWRU or professional early music ensemble, to put into practice the HPP skills and knowledge they have acquired at CWRU, and to observe and learn from professional performers and others in their field.
MUAP 700	Historical Performance Recital	0 Unit	Historical Performance Recital. Intended to demonstrate mastery of historically-informed performance in a number of different national styles.
IBMS 450	Fundamental Biostatistics to Enhance Research Rigor & Reproducibility	1 Unit	This is a required graduate level course for all first year PhD students in the School of Medicine biomedical PhD programs excluding Biomedical Engineering, Population and Quantitative Health Sciences, Molecular Medicine and Clinical Translation Science.  This course focuses on providing students with a basic working knowledge and understanding of best practices in biostatistics that can be applied to common biomedical research activities in numerous fields.  Weekly sessions involve a combination of basic programming activities, lectures, exercises, hands-on data manipulation and presentation.  Topics include experimental design and power analysis, hypothesis testing, descriptive statistics, linear regression, and others with an emphasis on when and in which experimental design a particular test is properly used.  The overall goal of the course is to empower students to use these biostatistics to enhance the rigor of their experimental design and reproducibility of their primary data.  The major focus is not on theory, but on a practical acquisition of a working knowledge of basic data processing analysis, interpretation, and presentation skills.
IBMS 453	Cell Biology I	3 Units	Part of the first semester curriculum for first year graduate students along with IBMS 455. This course is designed to give students an intensive introduction to prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell structure and function. Topics include membrane structure and function, mechanisms of protein localization in cells, secretion and endocytosis, the cytoskeleton, cell adhesion, cell signaling and the regulation of cell growth. Important methods in cell biology are also presented. This course is suitable for graduate students entering most areas of basic biomedical research. Undergraduate courses in biochemistry, cell and molecular biology are excellent preparation for this course. Recommended preparation: Undergraduate biochemistry or molecular biology.
IBMS 455	Molecular Biology I	3 Units	Part of the first semester curriculum for first year graduate students along with IBMS 453. This course is designed to give students an intensive introduction to prokaryotic and eukaryotic molecular biology. Topics include protein structure and function, DNA and chromosome structure, DNA replication, RNA transcription and its regulation, RNA processing, and protein synthesis. Important methods in molecular biology are also presented. This course is suitable for graduate students entering most areas of basic biomedical research. Undergraduate courses in biochemistry, cell and molecular biology are excellent preparation for this course. Recommended preparation: Undergraduate biochemistry or molecular biology.
IBMS 456A	Since You Were Born: Nobel Prize Biomedical Research in the Last 21 Years- Section A	1 Unit	This course is one of four sections that will cover major advances in biomedical research by review of Nobel Prize-winning topics from the past 21 years.  Each section will cover 8 Nobel prize topics (1 topic/2 hour session/week for 8 weeks).  Students will read critical research papers of the Nobel prize scientist(s) in preparation for guided in-class discussion led by the faculty mentor.  The IBMS 456A section will cover Nobel Prizes related to the areas of Genetics & Genome Science, Systems Biology & Bioinformatics, and RNA Biology.  These include: 1) 2012 Prize, J. Gurdon and S. Yamanaka: Mechanisms of pluripotent stem cell development and reprogramming; 2) 2010 Prize, R. Edwards: Development of in ,vitro fertilization; 3) 2009 Prize, E. Blackburn, C. Greider, andJ Szostack: Mechanisms of chromosome protection by telomeres and telomerase; 4) 2009 Prize, Y. Ramakrishnan, T. Steitz, and A. Yonath	Structure/function  analysis  of ribosomes; 5) 2007 Prize, M. Capecchi, M. Evans, and O. Smithies: Discovery/development of transgenic and gene-deletion methods in mice; 6) 2006 Prize, A. Fire and  C. Mello: Discovery/development  of RNA interference-gene silencing  methods; 7) 2006 Prize, R. Kornberg: Mechanisms of eukaryotic transcription; 8) 1995 Prize, E. Lewis, C. Nusslein-Volhard, and W. Wieschaus: Mechanisms of genetic control in early embryonic development.
IBMS 456B	Since You Were Born: Nobel Prize Biomedical Research in the Last 21 Years- Section B	1 Unit	This course is one of four sections that will cover major advances in biomedical research by review of Nobel Prize-winning topics from the past 21 years.  Each section will cover 8 Nobel prize topics (1 topic/2 hour session/week for 8 weeks).  Students will read critical research papers of the Nobel prize scientist(s) in preparation for guided in-class discussion led by the faculty mentor.  The IBMS 456B section will cover Nobel Prizes related to the areas of Molecular Biology & Microbiology, Molecular Virology, Pathology-Immunology, and Cell Biology.  These include: 1) 2016 Prize, Y. Ohsumi: Mechanisms  of Autophagy; 2) 2015 Prize, W. Campbell, S. Omura,  and Y. Tu: Therapies against roundworms & malaria; 3) 2011 Prize, B. Beutler, J. Hoffman, and R. Steinman: Mechanisms underlying innate immunity and adaptive immunity; 4) 2008 Prize,  H. zur Hausen, F. Barre-Sinoussi, and L. Montagnier: Discovery of human immunodeficiency virus and oncogenic papilloma viruses; 5) 2008 Prize, O. Shimomura, M. Chalfie, and R. Tsien: Discovery/development of green fluorescent protein for biological applications; 6) 2005 Prize, B. Marshall and J. Warren: Discovery of Helicobacter pyloris as pathogenic mechanism in peptic ulcers/gastritis; 7) 1999 Prize, G. Blobel: Mechanisms of protein sorting and subcellular trafficking; 8) 1996 Prize, P. Doherty and R. Zinkernagel: Mechanisms of cell-mediated immune defense.
IBMS 456C	Since You Were Born: Nobel Prize Biomedical Research in the Last 21 Years- Section C	1 Unit	This course is one of four sections that will cover major advances in biomedical research by review of Nobel Prize-winning topics from the past 21 years.  Each section will cover 8 Nobel prize topics (1 topic/2 hour session/week for 8 weeks).  Students will read critical research papers of the Nobel prize scientist(s) in preparation for guided in-class discussion led by the faculty mentor.  The IBMS 456B section will cover Nobel Prizes related to the areas of Biochemistry, Nutrition, Pharmacology, and Pathology-Cancer.  These include: 1) 2015 Prize, T. Lindahl, P. Modrich, and A. Sancar: Mechanisms of DNA Repair; 2) 2014 Prize, E. Betzig, S. Hell, W. Moerner: Development of super-resolution fluorescence microscopy; 3)2012 Prize, R. Lefkowitz and B. Kobilka: Structure/function analysis of G protein-coupled receptors; 4) 2004 Prize, 	A. Ciechanover, A. Hershko, and I. Rose: Mechanisms of ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation; 5) 2003 Prize, P. Lauterbur and P. Mansfield: Development of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) methods; 6) 2002 Prize, S. Brenner, H.R. Horvitz, and J. Sulston: Mechanisms for genetic regulation of organ development and programmed cell death: 7) 2002 Prize, J. Fenn, K. Tanaka, and K. Wuthrich: Development of mass spec and NMR methods for biological macromolecules; 8) 2001 Prize, L. Hartwell, T. Hunt, and P. Nurse: Mechanisms of cell cycle regulation.
IBMS 456D	Since You Were Born: Nobel Prize Biomedical Research in the Last 21 Years- Section D	1 Unit	This course is one of four sections that will cover major advances in biomedical research by review of Nobel Prize-winning topics from the past 21 years.  Each section will cover 8 Nobel prize topics (1 topic/2 hour session/week for 8 weeks).  Students will read critical research papers of the Nobel prize scientist(s) in preparation for guided in-class discussion led by the faculty mentor.  The IBMS 456D section will cover Nobel Prizes related to the areas of Neuroscience, Physiology & Biophysics, and Pathology-Molecular Basis of Disease.  These include: 1) 2014 Prize, J. O'Keefe, M-B. Moser, and E. Moser: Mechanisms of nerve cell spatial positioning in the brain; 2) 2013 Prize, J. Rothman, R. Scheckman, and T. Sudhof: Mechanisms of intracellular vesicle trafficking and biomolecule secretion; 3) 2004 Prize, R. Axel and L. Buck: Structure/function of odorant receptors and organization of olfactory system; 4) 2003 Prize: P. Agre and R. MacKinnon:Structure/function analysis of channel proteins in cell membranes; 5) 2000 Prize, A. Carlsson, P. Greengard, and E. Kandel: Mechanisms of signal transduction in the nervous system; 6) 1998 Prize, R. Furchgott, L. Ignarro, and F. Murad: Discovery/mechanisms of nitric oxide as signaling molecule in cardiovascular system; 7) 1997 Prize, S. Prusiner: Discovery/prions as new biological principle of infection in neurological disease; 8) 1997 Prize, P. Boyer, J Walker, and J. Skou: Mechanisms of mitochondrial ATP synthesis and Na, K-ATPase pump function.
IBMS 500	On Being a Professional Scientist: The Responsible Conduct of Research	1 Unit	The goal of this course is to provide graduate students with an opportunity to think through their professional ethical commitments before they are tested, on the basis of the scientific community's accumulated experience with the issues. Students will be brought up to date on the current state of professional policy and federal regulation in this area, and, through case studies, will discuss practical strategies for preventing and resolving ethical problems in their own work. The course is designed to meet the requirements for "instruction about responsible conduct in research" for BSTP and MSTP students supported through NIH/ADAMHA institutional training grant programs at Case. Attendance is required.
IBMS 501	Responsible Conduct of Research for Advanced Trainees	0 Unit	The life of a professional scientist is complicated, and it is not always easy to know how to "do the right thing" with regard to their data, colleagues, and subjects. Responsible Conduct of Research (RCR) is an essential component of research knowledge. Active thought about the issues of RCR should occur throughout a scientist's career. Instruction in RCR should be appropriate to the career stage of the individuals receiving training. All doctoral students in the School of Medicine receive initial RCR training in their second semester and NIH requires another intense exposure if doctoral students are four years beyond their initial training. The goal of this course is to provide fifth year biomedical doctoral students with additional RCR training by exposing them to a variety of research ethics topics through lectures and small group discussions led by professional scientists and ethicists.  Students will be brought up to date on the current state of professional policy and federal regulation regarding research (where these exist), and will discuss practical strategies for preventing and resolving ethical problems in their own work. This course is designed for predoctoral graduate students that are in their fifth year of graduate studies and MSTP students that are in their fourth year of their PhD phase of study. These sessions are also appropriate for postdoctoral trainees.
IHSC 300	Synthesis of Premedical Concepts	3 Units	This course aims to hone skills necessary to synthesize and integrate knowledge across multiple subject areas, and to assist in preparing for health professional school admission, such as the MCAT. The course is team taught to include faculty expertise in biochemistry, biology, chemistry, English, mathematics, physics, psychological sciences and sociology. Critical analysis and reasoning skills will be emphasized. Completion of introductory courses in all subject areas above is strongly recommended before taking this course. MCAT materials from the AAMC (Association of American Medical Colleges) will be used to guide and enhance a student's ability to synthesize across many fields, and increase critical reasoning and analytical competencies.
INTH 301	Fundamentals of Global Health	3 Units	This course seeks to integrate the multiple perspectives and objectives in global health by investigating how the disciplines of Biology, Medicine, Anthropology, Nursing, Mathematics, Engineering analyze and approach the same set of international health problems.  Students will develop a shared vocabulary with which to understand these various perspectives from within their own discipline.  The focus sites will emphasize issues related to the health consequences of development projects, emergency response to a health care crisis and diseases of development in presence of underdevelopment. Offered as INTH 301 and INTH 401. Prereq: Junior or senior.
INTH 315	Water Security and Social Justice in Brazil	3 Units	CWRU, through the Center for Global Health and Diseases, has had projects, student exchanges and courses with institutions in Brazil and especially with the state of Bahia for over 30 years.  In that time, personal and professional relationships have been developed with branches of the Ministry of Health (Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, the Municipal and State Health Departments), the Federal University of Bahia, and the Bahiana School of Medicine and Public Health.  Brazil is the second largest country in the Western Hemisphere and the 7th or 8th largest economy in the world.  There are more people who speak Portuguese in South America than Spanish.  Despite newly discovered oil, enormous natural and human resources, development in Brazil has been uneven with the Northeast remaining the least developed.  The Northeastern state of Bahia ranked 22nd out of 27 states on the UN's Index of Human Development (http://www.pnud.org.br/IDH/DH.aspx# and http://www.atlasbrasil.org.br/2013/pt/home/).  The State capital, Salvador, ranks 14th out of 20 major metropolitan regions and is one site for this study abroad program.  The second site, the rural town of Ubaíra, is ranked 4590 out of 5565 municipalities.  Even with large social inequities and health care disparities, the Brazilian government and society have produced remarkable social policies, have shown a willingness to implement these policies and have the resources to significantly improve the lives of its most impoverished citizens.  Critical basic infrastructure for health and development is water.  Its consumption is essential; it is a mechanism for waste disposal, industry and agriculture are dependent on its supply.  The problem of water quantity and quality are common all human societies (witness the drought in California and the burning Cuyahoga).  Individuals from all walks of life will need to assess issues of water at some time, from doctors, engineers, urban planners, lawyers and politicians.  In Brazil the issues of water are more exposed and easier to examine on different scales than in the U.S.  The problem also resides within a social, health care, and political context that compares well and at the same time contrasts sharply with that of the USA. As a student in this course, you will gain first-hand knowledge of the social and public health challenges regarding water security in Brazil.  Through field experiences in the capital city of Salvador and the rural town of Ubaíra, you will immerse yourself in interdisciplinary perspectives on the public health, scientific, political, and bioethical dimensions of water security in Brazil.  This immersive experience will be facilitated by faculty from the CWRU Dept. of Bioethics and the Center for Global Health and Diseases, the Brazilian Ministry of Health, the Federal University of Bahia, the Bahiana School of Medicine and Public Health, and Brazilian graduate student participants. Offered as: INTH 315, INTH 415, BETH 315H, and BETH 415H. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
INTH 401	Fundamentals of Global Health	3 Units	This course seeks to integrate the multiple perspectives and objectives in global health by investigating how the disciplines of Biology, Medicine, Anthropology, Nursing, Mathematics, Engineering analyze and approach the same set of international health problems.  Students will develop a shared vocabulary with which to understand these various perspectives from within their own discipline.  The focus sites will emphasize issues related to the health consequences of development projects, emergency response to a health care crisis and diseases of development in presence of underdevelopment. Offered as INTH 301 and INTH 401. Prereq: Graduate student.
INTH 415	Water Security and Social Justice in Brazil	3 Units	CWRU, through the Center for Global Health and Diseases, has had projects, student exchanges and courses with institutions in Brazil and especially with the state of Bahia for over 30 years.  In that time, personal and professional relationships have been developed with branches of the Ministry of Health (Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, the Municipal and State Health Departments), the Federal University of Bahia, and the Bahiana School of Medicine and Public Health.  Brazil is the second largest country in the Western Hemisphere and the 7th or 8th largest economy in the world.  There are more people who speak Portuguese in South America than Spanish.  Despite newly discovered oil, enormous natural and human resources, development in Brazil has been uneven with the Northeast remaining the least developed.  The Northeastern state of Bahia ranked 22nd out of 27 states on the UN's Index of Human Development (http://www.pnud.org.br/IDH/DH.aspx# and http://www.atlasbrasil.org.br/2013/pt/home/).  The State capital, Salvador, ranks 14th out of 20 major metropolitan regions and is one site for this study abroad program.  The second site, the rural town of Ubaíra, is ranked 4590 out of 5565 municipalities.  Even with large social inequities and health care disparities, the Brazilian government and society have produced remarkable social policies, have shown a willingness to implement these policies and have the resources to significantly improve the lives of its most impoverished citizens.  Critical basic infrastructure for health and development is water.  Its consumption is essential; it is a mechanism for waste disposal, industry and agriculture are dependent on its supply.  The problem of water quantity and quality are common all human societies (witness the drought in California and the burning Cuyahoga).  Individuals from all walks of life will need to assess issues of water at some time, from doctors, engineers, urban planners, lawyers and politicians.  In Brazil the issues of water are more exposed and easier to examine on different scales than in the U.S.  The problem also resides within a social, health care, and political context that compares well and at the same time contrasts sharply with that of the USA. As a student in this course, you will gain first-hand knowledge of the social and public health challenges regarding water security in Brazil.  Through field experiences in the capital city of Salvador and the rural town of Ubaíra, you will immerse yourself in interdisciplinary perspectives on the public health, scientific, political, and bioethical dimensions of water security in Brazil.  This immersive experience will be facilitated by faculty from the CWRU Dept. of Bioethics and the Center for Global Health and Diseases, the Brazilian Ministry of Health, the Federal University of Bahia, the Bahiana School of Medicine and Public Health, and Brazilian graduate student participants. Offered as: INTH 315, INTH 415, BETH 315H, and BETH 415H. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
INTH 484	Global Health Epidemiology	1 - 3 Units	This course provides a rigorous problem-centered training in the epidemiology, prevention, treatment, and control of infectious diseases and, more generally, global health.  This is an advanced epidemiology that embraces an active learning environment. Students are expected to invest time out of the classroom  reading and working with classmates. Classes will be conducted with discussions, debates, group projects, and group presentations.  By taking this course, students will develop a framework for interpreting, assessing, and performing epidemiologic research on issues of global importance.  The course will be divided into three modules:1) Global Health Epidemiology  2) Helminth Epidemiology, and 3) Epidemiology of Disease Elimination.  Each module is worth 1 credit hour and may be taken separately.  Each module will have a separate project and/or exam.  The final exam time will be used for group presentations and panel discussion.  Active class participation is required through discussions, case studies, and group projects. Offered as PQHS 484, INTH 484, and MPHP 484.
INTH 551	World Health Seminar	1 Unit	This seminar series examines a broad range of topics related to infectious disease research in international settings.  Areas of interest are certain to include epidemiology, bioethics, medical anthropology, pathogenesis, drug resistance, vector biology, cell and molecular biology, vaccine development, diagnosis, and socio-cultural factors contributing to or compromising effective health care delivery in endemic countries. Additionally we will discuss intellectual property policies on global access to medical innovations. Topics will also include neglected diseases and the interactions between these diseases with HIV and malaria infections. Speakers will include a diverse group of regional faculty and post-doctoral trainees, as well as visiting colleagues from around the world.  Students will be asked to read a journal article written by the speaker and then discuss this article with the speaker after their seminar.
INTL 396	International Independent Study	1 - 3 Units	Study of a topic within the scope of international studies. The student must complete a prospectus form, approved and signed by the supervising faculty member, no later than the second week of classes. The prospectus must outline the goals of the project and the research methodology to be used and is part of the basis for grading. Open to juniors and seniors majoring in international studies.
INTL 398	International Studies Senior Research Project	3 Units	Individual work with a faculty tutor leading to the writing of a major research paper. Open only to seniors majoring in international studies.
INTL 399	International Studies Colloquium	3 Units	This course offers seniors the opportunity to demonstrate their understanding of the complexity and dynamics of the human world as a result of majoring in International Studies.  Students analyze topics relevant to the foreign geographic areas and broad themes they have chosen for their major foci.  To do so, they draw on their international experiences, knowledge acquired through foreign languages, and prior coursework for the major.  Students share their conclusions in the seminar itself and in a public presentation. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone.
ITAL 101	Elementary Italian I	4 Units	Introductory course; stress on mastery of the sound system and basic sentence structure of spoken and written Italian. Independent laboratory practice is a requirement.
ITAL 102	Elementary Italian II	4 Units	Continuation of ITAL 101; independent laboratory practice is required in addition to scheduled class meetings. Prereq: ITAL 101.
ITAL 201	Review and Progress in Italian	4 Units	Emphasizes language and culture. Review of Italian grammar and usage while studying written forms. Independent laboratory practice is required in addition to scheduled class meetings. Prereq: ITAL 102 or equivalent.
ITAL 202	Read and Discuss Italian Texts	4 Units	Focus on increasing proficiency acquired in elementary Italian and on mastering short narratives. Review of Italian grammar and usage through reading, conversation, and media. Independent laboratory practice is required in addition to scheduled class meetings. Prereq: ITAL 201 or equivalent.
ITAL 308	The Italian Experience	3 Units	A three-week summer study abroad course spent at a university in an Italian city well-known for its cultural and linguistic heritage and at other important sites during travel.  Focus: Language immersion and processing of cultural experience.  Main features: 1. Intense collaboration with an Italian university.  Students interact with Italian peers; seminars are co-taught by Italian faculty.  2. Creation of an individual journal that synthesizes students' perception of and reflections on their experience, records the progress of their final project, and documents their improvement in language proficiency.  3. Final project.  Students meet M-F in a formal setting for advanced language study designed to improve proficiency in speaking, comprehension, reading, and writing. They attend seminars on varied topics in literature, history, and civilization.  Visits to museums, galleries, and attendance at cultural events are included. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ITAL 202 or equivalent.
ITAL 311	Conversation in Italian	3 Units	Focused on oral communication, ITAL 311 is designed to enhance listening/comprehension skills in Italian. Using audio-visual materials, students acquire the skills necessary to understand conversations between native-speakers and to emulate them.  The situational and functional approach to the course facilitates progress towards advanced-level fluency in Italian. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ITAL 202 or equivalent.
ITAL 370	Special Topics in Italian Literature	3 Units	Special topics in Italian literature, literary criticism, and culture. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: ITAL 202 or equivalent.
ITAL 399	Independent Study	1 - 3 Units	The course is for students with special interests and commitments that are not fully addressed in regular courses, and who wish to work independently.
JAPN 101	Elementary Japanese I	4 Units	Introduction to understanding, speaking, reading, and writing Japanese. Students learn to read and write hiragana and katakana syllabaries and 50 kanji characters. Students are expected to achieve control of the sound system and basic structure of the language. Emphasizes aural comprehension and speaking.
JAPN 102	Elementary Japanese II	4 Units	Continuation of JAPN 101. Emphasizes aural comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing. Students learn approximately 100 new kanji characters. Recommended preparation: JAPN 101.
JAPN 201	Intermediate Japanese I	4 Units	Further study of fundamental structures of Japanese. Students improve aural comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing abilities and learn approximately 100 new characters. Recommended preparation: JAPN 102 or equivalent. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JAPN 202	Intermediate Japanese II	4 Units	Continuation of JAPN 201. Students learn an additional 100 kanji characters. With the completion of JAPN 201 - 202, students should have control of the fundamentals of modern Japanese and a firm foundation in the writing system. Recommended preparation: JAPN 201 or equivalent. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JAPN 215	The World of Manga	3 Units	Manga (comic books and graphic novels) is one of the most important aspects of contemporary visual culture in Japan. It is consumed by millions of Japanese every day, and has attracted intense attention around the world. As it constitutes one third of the annual publications in Japan today, its breadth and scope are limitless.  What does manga reveal about contemporary cultural production and consumption in Japan? What kind of special features are used in manga to attract people so much? What kind of genres do they have and what kind of readers do they have? These are some of the questions we will explore by surveying a large number of works produced in the last fifty years. Introducing graphic novels by major artists and writers, the course will expand your understanding of key components, social movements and discourses associated with manga. You will examine the history of manga, its aesthetics, and social impact through assigned readings, including scholarly papers and manga books, as well as works selected by each student (in original Japanese or in English translation). Offered as JAPN 215 and WLIT 215. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JAPN 225	Japanese Popular Culture	3 Units	This course highlights salient aspects of modern Japanese popular culture as expressed in animation, comics and literature. The works examined include films by Hayao Miyazaki, writings by Kenji Miyazawa, Haruki Murakami and Banana Yoshimoto, among others. The course introduces students to essential aspects of modern Japanese popular culture and sensibility. Offered as JAPN 225 and WLIT 225. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JAPN 235	The Japan Experience: Kyoto - Language, Culture & Exchanges	3 Units	The Japan Experience: Kyoto is designed to provide students an opportunity to use Japanese language skills they have acquired in real life situations and deepen their understanding of Japanese language and culture through experiential learning. The course has three major learning components: "Japanese Language Learning through Activities and Cultural Experiences," "Japan Exploration Project," and "Exchanges with Local College Students" and will consist of class meetings before the trip focused on preparation followed by 15 days in Kyoto. Japanese Language Learning through Activities and Cultural Experiences:  In Kyoto students will explore the local neighborhood and report their findings in class. Several cultural activities will be organized: Zen meditation, tea activity, Japanese cooking class, etc. The tea activity will include a rare opportunity for students to meet a tea ceremony master and experience the way of Japanese traditional tea. Exchanges with Local College Students:  Students from CWRU will be able to take advantage of Ritsumeikan University's "Buddies" program where Japanese student volunteers are paired with participants to improve conversational skills and become better acquainted with the campus and Kyoto. CWRU students will also visit classes at a local college in Osaka for exchanges with students there. These exchanges will allow participants to reinforce their language skills, develop better communication skills, and deepen cultural understanding in both classroom and real-life settings. Japan Exploration Project:  Students will complete individual projects during the course. They will design their own projects using resources available in Kyoto before the trip and prepare for it. Project themes will be chosen by students based on their interests. At the end of course, students will give presentations in Japanese, demonstrating their language proficiency development. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: JAPN 201.
JAPN 245	Classical Japanese Literature in Translation	3 Units	Readings, in English translation, of classical Japanese poetry, essays, narratives, and drama to illustrate essential aspects of Japanese culture and sensibility before the Meiji Restoration (1868). Lectures explore the sociohistorical contexts and the character of major literary genres; discussions focus on interpreting the central images of human value within each period. Japanese sensibilities compared to and contrasted with those of Western and other cultures. Offered as JAPN 245 and WLIT 245. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JAPN 255	Modern Japanese Literature in Translation	3 Units	Focus on the major genres of modern Japanese literature, including poetry, short story, and novel (shosetsu). No knowledge of Japanese language or history is assumed. Lectures, readings, and discussions are in English. Films and slides complement course readings. Offered as JAPN 255 and WLIT 255. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JAPN 265	Constructing the Samurai: Images of Japanese Warriors from 1100's to the Present	3 Units	From concepts of premodern warriors calling out their names before doing hand-to-hand combat to modern salary men crushing the world with their economic prowess, samurai have come to be an iconic image of the Japanese people. Throughout the semester we will pay particular attention to the central themes in the historiography of warrior society, roughly, the years between ca. 1110 and 1850 C.E. We will investigate how these documents were translated by modern societies, both east and west, in samurai film. Students will explore the category of "samurai" through reading selections from The Tale of the Heike, as well as selected Noh plays, legal documents, travel diaries, autobiographies, short stories, and historical texts. In addition, we will investigate other genres contributing to the construction of the idea of "samurai," such as film.  This seminar will closely examine the concept of "samurai," particularly its connection to the Japanese identity using an interdisciplinary context of the arts, history, religion, and literature. We will also explore the ways in which daimyo (feudal lords), authors, Buddhist officials, and filmmakers throughout the world created, shaped, and altered the ideal image of the samurai. Key to understanding the concept of samurai will be wrestling with questions of authorship, spirit pacification, nationality, and patronage, with specific focus on the Japanese relationship with Western nations and cultures. We will focus on language and its role in legitimizing the global concepts of "samurai" and "bushido." This class will provide additional insight geared toward the cultural study of linguistic identities beyond those informed by the English language and will include terms expressed in Japanese. Many of the resources used in this course will be translated from the Japanese, allowing us to consider Naoki Sakai's theories of enunciation/ translation/ subjectivity, Haruo Shirane's theory of reception, and Michael Emmerich's theory of replacement. Especially important will be to focus on terms in Japanese with no, or poor, English equivalent (such as samurai, shogun, daimyo, bushido, etc.) but with clear images in the English-speaking imagination(s). The instructor will provide background information on political, cultural, and religious history. Class sessions will be conducted in English and combine lectures, discussion, audio-visual materials, and creative as well as analytical writing exercises. All readings and films will be in English or with English subtitle. Offered as JAPN 265 and WLIT 265. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JAPN 301	Advanced Japanese I	4 Units	Emphasizes conversational proficiency and reading. Recommended preparation: JAPN 202 or equivalent. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JAPN 302	Advanced Japanese II	4 Units	Continuation of JAPN 301; emphasizes conversational proficiency and reading. Recommended preparation: JAPN 301 or equivalent. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JAPN 306	Readings in Manga	3 Units	This course aims to enhance students' reading skills in Japanese as well as in the other three main areas of language learning (speaking, listening, and writing) through the use of the extensive reading (a.k.a. Graded reading) method with manga in Japanese.  In this course, the emphasis is put on acquiring the skill needed to enjoy reading content without translation. Students will review and learn Japanese structures and expressions as well as have the opportunity to explore colloquialisms, speech styles, onomatopoeia, contractions, interjections, and other elements of speech. The class also will incorporate individual reading activities such as oral reading sessions, timed reading, speed reading, and book discussion groups. We will also explore how Japanese scripts such Hiragana, Katakana, and Kanji, as well as Roman alphabets, are integrated in manga. Our primary textbooks will be manga in Japanese; however, some additional readings in English will be given to students as a point of reference for the course lectures. The classes will primarily be conducted in Japanese. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: JAPN 202 with a C or higher.
JAPN 315	Origins of Anime: Classical Texts, Modern Manga, Anime, and Tales	3 Units	Modern anime and manga authors and artists captivate audiences with rich stories and stylized art. This course investigates the origins of these stories by engaging premodern Japanese texts (in English language translation) and modern literary theory. Throughout the semester we will pay particular attention to commonalties among these literatures and narrative genres, as well as the extent they differ due to temporal/socio/religio/political concerns. Western and Asian literary theories, especially those concerning topics of translation, replacement, negotiation with classics, and gender and sexuality will also be extensively explored. We will interpret the historic human endeavor of story telling within the contexts of time and space and through a critical self-awareness of our own positions in the modern world. Students will prepare individual research projects and be responsible for finding and presenting primary sources and secondary research. The instructor will provide background information on political, cultural, and religious history as well as present on details of literary theory. The aim is to encourage students to critically analyze the modern perception of past events. Every topic will be addressed in three phases. First, the students will discover historical events, literature, and people through reading primary sources in English translation. In a second phase, we will see how these stories are depicted in movies, animation, or manga. Finally, students will perform research to explore the differences between the premodern sources and their modern adaptation and determine how we can use such a comparison to critically analyze the way modern storytellers recreate the past. Class sessions will combine lectures, discussion, and audio- visual materials. Offered as JAPN 315 and WLIT 315. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JAPN 335	Japanese Linguistics	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to survey the principal research in Japanese linguistics for students who have basic knowledge of Japanese and are interested in more in-depth treatment of linguistic phenomena (phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, etc.). Lectures and discussions will cover many different aspects of the Japanese language. There is a great deal of analytic studies of the Japanese language done both inside and outside Japan, which will be surveyed in this course.  Students will become familiar with the major issues through lectures and class discussions, as well as through their reading of both primary and secondary sources. Both formal and functional approaches to the analysis of Japanese will be examined, and the acquisition of these structures will also be discussed. The course will also be useful for the improvement of students' Japanese language proficiency.  Recommended preparation: JAPN 101 and JAPN 102, or equivalent competence in Japanese. Offered as COGS 335, COGS 435, JAPN 435, LING 335 and LING 435. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JAPN 337	Love and Loss: Reading The Tale of Genji	3 Units	Murasaki Shikibu's The Tale of Genji (c. 1000 CE), the great Japanese classic often referred to as "the world's first novel," has been praised by countless readers and scholars since it was first circulated within the imperial court. In this course we will read the entire text in English translation. We will focus on themes of love and loss, paying special attention to the substitution that results from the hero, the shining prince Genji, losing his mother at a tender age and attempting to fill the void she left. Since Genji is popularly thought of as a "playboy," we will investigate the thematic, historic, political, social, and religious descriptions within Genji's (many) love affairs, with a special emphasis on issues of gender. We will also consider the poetry, imagery, costume, music, religion, theater, and material culture of the mid-Heian era, which is encapsulated in the tale.  Students will prepare individual research projects and be responsible for finding and presenting primary sources and secondary research. The instructor will provide background information on political, cultural, and religious history as well as present on details of literary theory. The aim is to encourage students to critically analyze the modern perception of the past. Class sessions will combine lectures, discussion, and audio- visual materials.  All material is in English translation. There are no prerequisites. The course is conducted in English. Offered as JAPN 337 and WLIT 337. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JAPN 341	Power of Words: Ritual Uses of Premodern Japanese Literature	3 Units	In premodern Japan, it was not only death and mourning ritual and practice that could pacify the spirit of the deceased, but also language. Authors consciously crafted the words of their works to simultaneously express the grief associated with longing and pacify the spirits of the dead. These words are called kotodama (power of words). From as far back as the eighth-century Kojiki (Records of Ancient Matters) and Nihon Shoki (The Chronicles of Japan) textual representations of mourning were linked with special uses of language and spirit pacification. At the death of Ame-no-wakahiko (a mythological god), his parents constructed a mourning hut and performed songs to secure his spirit in the afterworld. As several authors have demonstrated, from kotodama in the mid-eighth-century poetic anthology Man'y'sh, (Collection of Ten Thousand Leaves) to linked verse (renga) in medieval Japan, carefully constructed literary language also had a place in ritual pacification of the spirits of the dead. Words were not simple expressions of grief; they held power.  All material is in English translation. The course is conducted in English. All material will be provided via PDF. Offered as JAPN 341 and WLIT 341 and RLGN 341. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JAPN 350	Contemporary Japanese Texts I	3 Units	The primary aim of this course is to develop communication skills in Japanese based on those that the students have acquired in JAPN 302 or equivalent.  The students will read and discuss various texts such as daily conversations, essays, and news scripts with the assistance of vocabulary and kanji (Chinese character) lists and formal grammar explanations.  Attention also will be given to enhancing the students' writing and aural/oral proficiencies through regularly assigned homework, presentations, tape listening, video viewing, and classroom discussion. Recommended preparation: JAPN 302 or equivalent. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JAPN 351	Contemporary Japanese Texts II	3 Units	This course is a continuation of JAPN 350 and its primary aim overlaps with that of JAPN 350: to develop more sophisticated communication skills in Japanese.  Students will read and discuss various texts such as daily conversations, essays, and news scripts largely with the assistance of vocabulary and kanji (Chinese character) lists.  Attention will be given to enhancing the students' writing and aural/oral proficiencies through regularly assigned homework, presentations, tape listening, video viewing, and classrooms discussion. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement. Prereq: JAPN 350 or consent of instructor.
JAPN 355	Modern Japanese Novels and the West	3 Units	This course will compare modern Japanese and Western novellas, drama, and novels.  Comparisons will focus on the themes of family, gender and alienation, which subsume a number of interrelated sub-themes such as marriage, home, human sexuality, amae (dependence), innocence, experience, death, God/gods, and nature (the ecosystem).   Offered as JAPN 355 and WLIT 355. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JAPN 396	Senior Capstone - Japanese	3 Units	The Senior Capstone in Japanese is an independent study project chosen in consultation with a capstone advisor.  The capstone project should reflect both the student's interest within Japanese and the courses he or she has taken to fulfill the major.  The project requires independent research using an approved bibliography and plan of action.  In addition to written research, the student will also present the capstone project in a public forum that is agreed upon by the project advisor and the student. Counts as SAGES Senior Capstone. Prereq: Senior status required. Major in Japanese required.
JAPN 397	Senior Thesis I	3 Units	Intensive study of a literary, linguistic, or cultural topic with a faculty member, leading to the writing of a research paper in English or Japanese. Limited to senior majors. Permit required.
JAPN 398	Senior Thesis II	3 Units	Continuation of JAPN 397. Limited to senior majors. Prereq: JAPN 397.
JAPN 399	Independent Study	1 - 3 Units	Directed study for students who have progressed beyond available course offerings.
JAPN 435	Japanese Linguistics	3 Units	The purpose of this course is to survey the principal research in Japanese linguistics for students who have basic knowledge of Japanese and are interested in more in-depth treatment of linguistic phenomena (phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, etc.). Lectures and discussions will cover many different aspects of the Japanese language. There is a great deal of analytic studies of the Japanese language done both inside and outside Japan, which will be surveyed in this course.  Students will become familiar with the major issues through lectures and class discussions, as well as through their reading of both primary and secondary sources. Both formal and functional approaches to the analysis of Japanese will be examined, and the acquisition of these structures will also be discussed. The course will also be useful for the improvement of students' Japanese language proficiency.  Recommended preparation: JAPN 101 and JAPN 102, or equivalent competence in Japanese. Offered as COGS 335, COGS 435, JAPN 435, LING 335 and LING 435. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JAPN 451	Japanese in Cultural Context II	3 Units	This course is a continuation of JAPN 450 and it aims at a further development of sophisticated communication skills (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) in Japanese.  The students will read and discuss various texts in the original, such as essays, news scripts, and literary works both classical and modern.  Classroom instruction and discussion will be conducted in Japanese.  The students also will be required to write a research paper of 6000-8000 letters/characters (15-20 genkoyoshi pages) in Japanese on a topic related to Japan and the student's specialty. Recommended preparation: JAPN 450 or equivalent.
JDST 101	Jews and Judaism	3 Units	This course provides an introduction to Jewish religion, culture, history, and life.  It does not presuppose any previous study of Judaism or experience with Judaism, and it prepares students for additional coursework in Judaic studies, Jewish history, or religious studies with an emphasis on Judaism.  Required for the minor in Judaic Studies. Offered as JDST 101 and RLGN 213. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JDST 173	Introducing Judaism	3 Units	This "topics" course offers an introduction to the academic study of Judaism. Whether approached through a particular theme or as a general historical introduction, each section of this course provides students with a general introduction to the academic study of religion and basic religious literacy in Jewish religious tradition, exploring forms of it in a diversity of cultural contexts around the world.  Section topics could include, but are not limited to:  Festivals and Holy Days, Women and Gender, Jewish Ethics.  Students may repeat the course for credit (up to 6 credits), provided that the two sections are different. Offered as RLGN 173 and JDST 173. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JDST 218	Jews in Early Modern Europe	3 Units	This course surveys the history of Jews in Europe and the wider world from the Spanish expulsion through the French Revolution.  Tracking peregrinations out of the Iberian Peninsula to the British Isles, France, Holland, Italy, Germany, Poland-Lithuania, the Ottoman Empire, and the American colonies, it examines the diverse ways Jews organized their communities, interacted with their non-Jewish neighbors, and negotiated their social, economic, and legal status within different states and empires.  What role did Jews play and what symbolic place did they occupy during a period of European expansion, technological innovation, artistic experimentation, and religious and political turmoil?  What internal and external dynamics affected Jewish experiences in the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries?  Through a selection of inquisitorial transcripts, government records, memoirs, and historical literature, we will explore topics such as persecution, conversion, messianism, toleration, emancipation, and assimilation. Offered as HSTY 218, JDST 218, and ETHS 218. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JDST 220	Jewish Art and Architecture	3 Units	Tradition and transformation in Jewish artistic expression over time and across space.  Course will begin with biblical period and continue down to the present day in Israel and America.  Examination of how concepts such as "Jewish" and "art" undergo change within the Jewish community over this period. Offered as ARTH 220, JDST 220, and RLGN 220. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JDST 228	The Jewish Image in Popular Film	3 Units	This course will explore film as social practice from the flickering silent era, through Hollywood's Golden Age, to the techno-dazzle of today. Standing at the confluence of society, history, ideology and culture, students will come to understand how popular film is shaped by, and how it actively shapes, the constant reconstruction of Jewish identity in the American mainstream. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JDST 233	Introduction to Jewish Folklore	3 Units	Exploration of a variety of genres, research methods and interpretations of Jewish folklore, from antiquity to the present. Emphasis on how Jewish folk traditions and culture give us access to the spirit and mentality of the many different generations of the Jewish ethnic group, illuminating its past and informing the direction of its future development.   Offered as ANTH 233, RLGN 233, and JDST 233. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JDST 254	The Holocaust	3 Units	This class seeks to answer fundamental questions about the Holocaust: the German-led organized mass murder of nearly six million Jews and millions of other ethnic and religious minorities.  It will investigate the origins and development of racism in modern European society, the manifestations of that racism, and responses to persecution.  An additional focus of the course will be comparisons between different groups, different countries, and different phases during the Nazi era. Offered as HSTY 254, RLGN 254, ETHS 254, and JDST 254. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JDST 255	Global Judaism: Diversity Across the Jewish World	3 Units	Scattered across the globe over the course of millennia, Jews' diverse histories and environments have given rise to a great range of religious, cultural and social forms. Using ethnographies as our primary texts, we will think critically and comparatively about Judaism and Jewishness in the Americas, Europe, Africa, and Asia.  Along our journey, we examine how Jews have navigated their experiences as minorities in their many diaspora homelands, and how they have they adapted their cultural and religious practices to the various environments in which they have found themselves.  In addition to exploring their Jewishness vis-à-vis others, we also examine questions of exclusion and belonging that Jews have faced as they have encountered each another in recent decades through tourism, mass migration, globalization, and the internet. How do the world's varied Jewish groups - who are of different skin colors, who speak different languages, and who carry different historical memories - navigate ethnic divides, race relations, and religious diversity? Should we speak of a single Jewish religion and Jewish people at all? Offered as ANTH 255, ETHS 255, JDST 255 and RLGN 255. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JDST 268	Women in the Bible: Ethnographic Approaches to Rite and Ritual, Story, Song, and Art	3 Units	Examination of women in Jewish and Christian Biblical texts, along with their Jewish, Christian (and occasionally Muslim) interpretations. Discussion of how these traditions have shaped images of, and attitudes toward, women in western civilization. Offered as RLGN 268, WGST 268, and JDST 268.
JDST 314	Mythologies of the Afterlife	3 Units	This course provides a multidisciplinary approach to the idea of an afterlife, and its manifestation in diverse cultures.  We will examine the way varying views of the afterlife influence religion, popular culture and palliative care, and how human creativity has shaped the heavens, hells, hauntings and holidays of diverse populations over time and across space.  Students will come to see the afterlife as an integral part of human history and experience, not only because it helps people die with better hope, but because it helps them to live more richly.   Offered as RLGN 314 and JDST 314.
JDST 371	Jews Under Islam and Christianity	3 Units	This course examines the social and political status of Jews under Muslim and Christian rule since the Middle Ages.  Themes include interfaith relations, Islamic and Christian beliefs regarding the Jews, Muslim and Christian regulation of Jewry, and the Jewish response. Offered as HSTY 371, JDST 371 and RLGN 371. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JDST 389	History of Zionism	3 Units	This course seeks to elucidate the major strands of Zionism, their origins, how they have interacted, and their impact on contemporary Israeli society.  These may include political Zionism, cultural Zionism, socialist (labor) Zionism, Revisionist Zionism, and religious Zionism.  This course will also examine the differences in the appeal of Zionism to Jews in different places, such as Western Europe, Eastern Europe and the United States. Offered as HSTY 389 and JDST 389. Counts as SAGES Departmental Seminar. Counts for CAS Global & Cultural Diversity Requirement.
JDST 392	Independent Study	1 - 3 Units	Up to three semester hours of independent study may be taken in a single semester.
LATN 101	Elementary Latin I	3 Units	An introduction to the elements of Latin: pronunciation, forms, syntax, vocabulary, and reading.
LATN 102	Elementary Latin II	3 Units	An introduction to the elements of Latin: pronunciation, forms, syntax, vocabulary, and reading. Prereq: LATN 101 or equivalent.
LATN 201	Latin Prose Authors	3 Units	Reading and discussion of such prose authors as Cicero, Caesar, Livy or Pliny.  Offered as LATN 201, LATN 401, WLIT 241 and WLIT 441. Prereq: LATN 102 or equivalent.
LATN 202	Vergil	3 Units	Primarily readings from The Aeneid; selections from Vergil's other work may be introduced at instructor's discretion. Recommended preparation: LATN 201 or equivalent.   Offered as LATN 202, LATN 402, WLIT 232 and WLIT 432.
LATN 308	Horace: Odes and Epodes	3 Units	Readings and discussion of extensive selections from the poetry of Horace; consideration of Horace as exemplifying the spirit of the Augustan Age.  Offered as LATN 308, LATN 408, WLIT 348, and WLIT 448. Prereq: 200-level LATN or equivalent.
LATN 309	Medieval Latin	3 Units	Reading and interpretation of Latin texts from the Middle Ages. Material selected according to the needs and interests of students.   Offered as LATN 309, LATN 409, WLIT 349, and WLIT 449. Prereq: 200-level LATN or equivalent.
LATN 351	Latin Didactic Literature	3 Units	Readings from didactic poetry such as Lucretius and Vergil's Georgics.  Parodies like Ovid's Ars Amatoria or prose treatises may also be introduced. Offered as LATN 351, LATN 451, WLIT 351, and WLIT 451. Prereq: 200-level LATN or equivalent.
LATN 354	Drama	3 Units	Reading of at least one play each by Plautus and Terence. Attention to the history of Latin and Greek New Comedy, and the contrasting styles of the two authors. Offered as LATN 354, LATN 454, WLIT 354, and WLIT 454. Prereq: 200-level LATN or equivalent.
LATN 355	The Roman Novel	3 Units	Readings from the two surviving Roman novels, Petronius' Satyricon and Apuleius' Metamorphoses or Golden Ass. There will also be discussion of the  major themes and approaches to the Roman novel. Recommended preparation: LATN 200 level course or equivalent.  Offered as LATN 355 and LATN 455.
LATN 356	Elegiac Poetry	3 Units	In this course we shall translate and interpret selected elegies by Catullus, Tibulius, Propertius, and Ovid.  We will also devote considerable class time to the reading and in-depth analysis of the major secondary literature, starting with the introductory pieces in the newest companions published by Brill and Cambridge, and moving on to fundamental articles and perhaps even a full scholarly monograph.   Offered as LATN 356, LATN 456, WLIT 336, and WLIT 436. Prereq: 200-level LATN or equivalent.
LATN 380	Advanced Topics in Latin Literature	3 Units	Study and discussion of important authors, works, and topics not covered regularly. Content will reflect particular interests of students and faculty and timeliness of topics. Offered as LATN 380 and LATN 480. Prereq: 200-level LATN or equivalent.
LATN 395	Directed Readings	1 - 3 Units	Directed readings in Latin of authors selected to serve the individual interests and needs of undergraduate students. Each program planned and completed under the supervision of the instructor with whom the student wishes to work. Offered as LATN 395 and LATN 495.
LATN 401	Latin Prose Authors	3 Units	Reading and discussion of such prose authors as Cicero, Caesar, Livy or Pliny.  Offered as LATN 201, LATN 401, WLIT 241 and WLIT 441.
LATN 402	Vergil	3 Units	Primarily readings from The Aeneid; selections from Vergil's other work may be introduced at instructor's discretion. Recommended preparation: LATN 201 or equivalent.   Offered as LATN 202, LATN 402, WLIT 232 and WLIT 432.
LATN 408	Horace: Odes and Epodes	3 Units	Readings and discussion of extensive selections from the poetry of Horace; consideration of Horace as exemplifying the spirit of the Augustan Age.  Offered as LATN 308, LATN 408, WLIT 348, and WLIT 448.
LATN 409	Medieval Latin	3 Units	Reading and interpretation of Latin texts from the Middle Ages. Material selected according to the needs and interests of students.   Offered as LATN 309, LATN 409, WLIT 349, and WLIT 449.
LATN 451	Latin Didactic Literature	3 Units	Readings from didactic poetry such as Lucretius and Vergil's Georgics.  Parodies like Ovid's Ars Amatoria or prose treatises may also be introduced. Offered as LATN 351, LATN 451, WLIT 351, and WLIT 451.
LATN 454	Drama	3 Units	Reading of at least one play each by Plautus and Terence. Attention to the history of Latin and Greek New Comedy, and the contrasting styles of the two authors. Offered as LATN 354, LATN 454, WLIT 354, and WLIT 454.
LATN 455	The Roman Novel	3 Units	Readings from the two surviving Roman novels, Petronius' Satyricon and Apuleius' Metamorphoses or Golden Ass. There will also be discussion of the  major themes and approaches to the Roman novel. Recommended preparation: LATN 200 level course or equivalent.  Offered as LATN 355 and LATN 455.
LATN 456	Elegiac Poetry	3 Units	In this course we shall translate and interpret selected elegies by Catullus, Tibulius, Propertius, and Ovid.  We will also devote considerable class time to the reading and in-depth analysis of the major secondary literature, starting with the introductory pieces in the newest companions published by Brill and Cambridge, and moving on to fundamental articles and perhaps even a full scholarly monograph.   Offered as LATN 356, LATN 456, WLIT 336, and WLIT 436.
LATN 480	Advanced Topics in Latin Literature	3 Units	Study and discussion of important authors, works, and topics not covered regularly. Content will reflect particular interests of students and faculty and timeliness of topics. Offered as LATN 380 and LATN 480.
LATN 495	Directed Readings	1 - 3 Units	Directed readings in Latin of authors selected to serve the individual interests and needs of undergraduate students. Each program planned and completed under the supervision of the instructor with whom the student wishes to work. Offered as LATN 395 and LATN 495.
LFIN 1002	Introduction to Criminal Law and Procedure	2 Units	Students will gain a basic understanding of criminal law, including goals of the criminal justice systems, sources of criminal law, elements of crimes, available defenses, and personal and enterprise liability. Students will also gain a basic understanding of criminal procedure, including the roles played by prosecutors, defense attorneys, victims, and judges; the criminal process from arrest through conviction; and substantive and procedural protections afforded to criminal suspects. Prereq: Students enrolled in MA Financial Integrity program.
LFIN 1003	Proceeds of Crime and Money Laundering	2 Units	Students will examine the key crimes that result in financial proceeds and serve as predicate offenses to the crime of money laundering, including trafficking in human beings; sexual exploitation; illicit trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances; illicit arms trafficking; corruption and bribery; environmental crimes; and tax crimes.  Students also study the FATF recommendation regarding predicate offenses and differing national approaches to predicate offenses. Prereq: Students enrolled in MA Financial Integrity program.
LFIN 1004	Money Laundering in Practice	2 Units	Students will discuss why and how money is laundered.  Students will explore the various mechanisms and typologies engaged in by those laundering money. Topics will include trade-based money laundering; cash smuggling; gambling; luxury goods; shell companies; real estate schemes; fraud and identity theft; and diamond, gold, and other precious metal trading. Prereq: Students enrolled in MA Financial Integrity program.
LFIN 1005	International AML/CFT Standards	2 Units	In this course students are introduced to international standards for combatting money laundering and related crimes. Students will learn about the international standards set by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and other international organizations, learn about the mutual evaluation process by which countries' efforts are measured, and discuss the ramifications when nations fail to comply with international standards. Prereq: Students enrolled in MA Financial Integrity program.
LFIN 1006	Sanctions and Combatting the Financing of Terrorism and Weapons Proliferation	2 Units	This course focuses on the threat of global terrorism and international and domestic standards and requirements to counter the financing of terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD).  The course will also focus on United Nations, regional, and national sanctions, and resulting restrictions and obligations. Prereq: Students enrolled in MA Financial Integrity program.
LFIN 1007	Law, Legislation and Regulation in Practice (MAFI)	2 Units	Regulatory obligations are numerous, substantial, and increasing. Business and law have become so intertwined that statutes and regulations are not just for lawyers anymore. To perform their responsibilities competently, effectively, and ethically, numerous non-lawyers (including middle-level and top-level executives) must acquire the knowledge and skills needed to conduct business in regulatory-intensive environments. This course is the foundation for acquiring these competencies. Prereq: Students enrolled in MA Financial Integrity program.
LFIN 1008	Fin Inst AML/CFT Obligations	2 Units	Students will study the AML/CFT requirements imposed on financial institutions, including those related to customer onboarding, customer due diligence, compliance with Office of Foreign Asset Control (OFAC) rules, record-keeping and reporting. Students will consider issues involved in banking high-risk clients and offering high-risk products, and issues for peer-to-peer and crowdfunding platforms. Students will also study high-risk affiliations for financial institutions, such as correspondent banking. Topics of focus will include suspicious activity detection and reporting, structuring transactions, and currency transaction monitoring.
LFIN 1009	Risk Managment	2 Units	Students will consider risk, compliance, governance, and ethics issues in the financial institution setting. Students will learn about regulatory compliance requirements, enterprise risk management, risk management practices, risk assessments, special considerations for different types of financial institutions, and how to design an effective and sustainable BSA/AML Program.
LFIN 1010	Risk Leadership	2 Units	Students study key risk leadership and management competencies required of financial integrity professionals.  Topics include keys to effective leadership and management; building trusting relationships; change leadership and transformation; the role and responsibilities of the Board of Directors and management; and creating an ethical institutional culture of risk management and compliance.
LFIN 1011	Supervision and Enforcement of Financial Instituitions AML.CFT Obligations	2 Units	Students learn about the supervisory process and supervisory examinations by regulators.  Students study enforcement actions brought by governmental agencies, and the remedies that can be sought in those actions, including administrative penalties, criminal and civil penalties, and civil and criminal forfeiture.  Students will also discuss private actions that may be brought against financial institutions for violations.
LFIN 1012	Investigating and Prosecuting Financial Crimes	2 Units	This course examines how financial intelligence units, investigators, prosecutors, and investigative judges/magistrates investigate and prosecute financial integrity crimes, including how officials in different nations cooperate in those investigations and prosecutions. Students also study freezing and confiscation of assets and criminal proceeds.
LFIN 1013	New Technologies and AML/CFT Risks	2 Units	This course will cover the rise of technology and the impact new technology is having on the financial crimes industry. Students will study cryptocurrency, initial coin offerings and crypto asset-backed offerings, blockchain, bitcoin, and the use of artificial intelligence. Students will study the ethics and compliance issues that arise with the advent of new technologies and the growing reliance on technology in operational execution of AML/CFT programs. Prereq: Students enrolled in MA Financial Integrity program.
LFIN 1014	Selected Topics in Financial Integrity	2 Units	In this course students will study a current pressing topic in financial integrity.   Topics will vary from year to year. Prereq: Students enrolled in MA Financial Integrity program.
LEAP 401	Introduction to Nurse Anesthesiology Specialty I	2 Units	This course will focus on the continuum of anesthetic states influenced by clinical anesthesia pharmacology. Coreq: LEAP 402.
LEAP 402	Writing Workshop I	1 Unit	This course will engage students in increasing their understanding of concepts in academic dialogue and magnifying their ability to write effectively. It will include an examination of scholarly writing techniques. Coreq: LEAP 401.
LEAP 403	Introduction to Nurse Anesthesiology Specialty II	2 Units	This course will focus on the basic principles of anesthesia practice. Prereq: LEAP 401 and LEAP 402. Coreq: LEAP 404, LEAP 405, and LEAP 406.
LEAP 404	Human Physiology	3 Units	This course will provide an in-depth understanding of the function, regulation, and integration of human organ systems. Emphasis will be placed on homeostasis in health and disease. Course content will include introductory cell physiology and major organ systems. Prereq: LEAP 401  and LEAP 402. Coreq: LEAP 403, LEAP 405, and LEAP 406.
LEAP 405	Professional Aspects and Leadership in Nurse Anesthesiology	1 Unit	This course will focus on the study of the role of the advance practice nurse in Nurse Anesthesiology, including principles of leadership. Prereq: LEAP 401 and LEAP 402. Coreq: LEAP 403, LEAP 404, and LEAP 406.
LEAP 406	Writing Workshop II	1 Unit	This course will build on scholarly writing techniques and introduce concepts related to academic dialogue. The course will provide a review of the writing process for dissemination. Prereq: LEAP 401 and LEAP 402. Coreq: LEAP 403, LEAP 404, and LEAP 405.
LEAP 407	Introduction to Nurse Anesthesiology Specialty III	2 Units	This course will focus on the clinical management of nurse anesthesiology practice. Prereq: LEAP 403. Coreq: LEAP 408 and LEAP 409.
LEAP 408	Pathophysiology	3 Units	This course will provide an in-depth understanding of health and pathologic alterations across the lifespan. A focused review of etiology, symptomology, and the psychophysical response to disease and injury will be incorporated. Prereq: LEAP 404. Coreq: LEAP 407 and LEAP 409.
LEAP 409	Writing Workshop III	1 Unit	This course will expand students' understanding of concepts in academic dialogue. It will enhance students' ability to develop and discuss the underpinnings of scholarly writing. Prereq: LEAP 403, LEAP 404, LEAP 405, and LEAP 406. Coreq: LEAP 407 and LEAP 408.
